Once upon a time there was a famine in the land of the animals. One day, the lizard was passing by a farm when he saw the farmer approach a rock. The lizard hid and watched as the farmer rolled the rock away to reveal the entrance into a cave. The farmer went inside and came out a few minutes later with a handful of yams and rolled the rock back into its place. The lizard waited for the farmer to leave then he too rolled away the rock and went into the cave. Inside the cave were several stacks of yams. The lizard took out a yam, and rolled the rock back into its place. Everyday, the lizard would return to the cave to take a yam and would go home to eat the yam.
One day the lizard was carrying his yam home, he came across the tortoise who asked him where he had gotten his yam. He offered to tell him on the condition that the tortoise told no one. The tortoise promised to keep the secret, so the lizard told the tortoise to meet him the following morning and he would take him to the secret cave. Early the next morning, before the very first cock crow, the lizard and the tortoise went to the secret cave. When they got there, the lizard rolled the rock away to reveal the entrance to the cave. The tortoise could not believe his eyes for there were more yams in there than even he could eat, because the tortoise was a very greedy fellow.
The lizard picked a yam and started on his way home but the tortoise was not done yet. He was going to carry as many yams as he could and maybe even more. Very soon, the farmer came and found the tortoise who was still busy collecting yams. By this time, the lizard was home, had eaten his yam and was taking a nap. The farmer grabbed the tortoise and asked him how he came to be in the cave. The tortoise confessed that the lizard had brought him there, so the farmer took tortoise to the lizard's house. There they found lizard lying on his back. The farmer asked lizard if it was he who brought tortoise to his cave. The lizard was shocked and said it was not possible as he had been feeling unwell and lying on his back all day. The farmer grabbed the tortoise and threw him against the wall and the tortoise lay on the floor with a broken shell. The tortoise cried out to the insects of the forest who helped him pick up and glue the pieces of his shell together. And that was how the tortoise ended up with a broken shell.

There was a famine in the animal kingdom and Ijapa the tortoise was finding that food was hard to come by. However, he found out that all the birds in the forest were preparing for the great annual bird feast in the sky and those who had been lucky enough to attend this annual event could testify to the abundance of food at the feast. Since the feast took place in the sky, only the birds could attend. But Ijapa the tortoise was not one to give up so easily. He went to every bird and borrowed a feather making up one excuse or the other. He glued all these feathers to his back and all over his body and soon, he was the most colorful bird you had ever seen.
On the day of the feast, Ijapa the tortoise joined the other birds to make the trip to the great feast in the sky. The other birds could not recognize this strange colorful bird and asked him who he was. He said his name was "all of us".
When it was time for the feast, all the food was laid out on a table. Ijapa the tortoise asked, "who does this food belong to?" and all the birds answered "all of us". Ijapa the tortoise said, "that is me, my name is "all of us?" and he ate all the food while the birds had none. The birds were so angry that they grabbed "all of us", but as they grabbed him, his feathers would come off until the tortoise was revealed. To punish him, the birds decided to leave him in the sky, they would not fly him back to land. Tortoise begged the birds to give a message to his wife. He asked his wife to lay out as many mattresses as she could find so he could have a soft landing. The birds who were still angry asked his wife to bring out all the furniture in the house and that was what she did.
The tortoise jumped from the sky, but instead of landing on a soft mattress, he landed on wood furniture and his shell broke into many pieces. His wife collected these pieces and glued them together and that is why the tortoise does not have a smooth shell.

There was a famine in the animal kingdom. This famine had lasted so long that any existing source of food had been completely depleted. The animals knew they had to do something real quick or they would all die off one by one. They called a meeting where every animal was in attendance and they determined that they had to do something drastic. It was decided that the mothers would be sacrificed to ensure the continuation of the animal races. They would eat their mothers.
The dog who had been at the meeting decided to hide his mother. He was not going to sacrifice his mother, so he hid her in the sky. Everyday, he would go to a particular spot where he sang a song asking his mother to drop a rope.
Dog would sing:
Iya Iya ta?kun wa le o
Alu jon jonki jon
Gbogbo araye pa yeye re je
Alu jon jonki jon
Aja gbe ti re o d?orun
Alu jon jonki jon
Iya Iya ta?kun wa le o
Alu jon jonki jon
Mother Mother send down your rope
[Chorus]
All have killed and eaten their mothers
[Chorus]
Dog has taken his mother to the sky
[Chorus]
Mother Mother send down your rope
[Chorus]
His mother would drop a rope and the dog would climb to the sky where his mother would have a feast waiting for him.
One day as the dog was singing for his mother to drop the rope, the tortoise was passing by and he hid himself to observe what was going on. He heard the song dog was singing, then he saw a rope being dropped from the sky with which the dog climbed to the sky.
The following day, the tortoise went to the same spot and disguising his voice like the dog's, he sang the song he had heard the dog sing the day before. A rope dropped from the sky and the tortoise began to climb this rope. At this same time, the dog was just approaching the same spot and he saw the tortoise climbing to the sky. The dog immediately started to sing to his mother. This time, he sang that he was not the one climbing the rope and his mother should cut the rope. Dog's mother got a pair of scissors and cut the rope sending the tortoise crashing to the ground. This caused tortoise shell to break into several pieces. He managed to glue these pieces together but that is how the tortoise ended up with the rough shell we know today.

Ijapa the tortoise was not always a bald animal. He used to have hair on his head, however, due to unfortunate circumstances, which the tortoise brought "upon his own head" literally speaking, he lost it all.
It happened a very long time ago, long before the tortoise broke his back, but that is another story altogether. The dog and his family had prepared a feast of yam porridge. The aroma reached the tortoise who immediately followed his nose which led him to the dog's home. The tortoise went in and saw that a big pot of yam porrigde was cooking. Wanting all of it for himself, he called out to the dog and told him that he had brought a message from from the king. "The king wishes to see you and all your family in the palace", the tortoise said. The dogs immediately left to see the king leaving the tortoise with the big simmering pot of yam porrigde. The tortoise began to eat as fast as he could. He knew that the dogs would be back soon because the king was not even at the palace.
And soon, he heard the dogs approaching. There was still a lot of porrigde left in the pot. The tortoise wanted to take some home with him and looked around for something he could put some porrigde in. The dogs by now were almost at the door. As he was running out of time, the tortoise pulled off his cap, filled it with the porrigde and put it back on so nobody would know he was carrying porrigde. He planned to hurry off immediately because the porridge on his head was indeed hot.
When the dogs came in, the tortoise told them he would be leaving. They dogs asked him to stay with them for lunch as they had some porridge cooking. The tortoise tried to make excuses to leave immediately, but the dogs kept him, trying to convince him to stay.
Eventually, the porridge was so hot that the tortoise just had to pull off his hat. Everybody was shocked when he pulled of his hat to reveal steaming hot porridge. The porridge had burned his scalp so badly that all his hair fell off and in fact, never grew back again.

Ijapa the tortoise and his wife Yorinbo have been married for a long time but do not have a child. This made Yorinbo very sad. He decided to seek help from a medicine man. The medicine man prepared a powerful potion that would make Yonribo pregnant. He mixed it into a delicious smelling beef stew and handed it to Ijapa the tortoise to give to his wife. The tortoise carried the pot and set off for home.
Very soon, the beef stew aroma became overpowering and the tortoise thought he should take a peek into the pot. Inside were very large juicy chunks of meat and Ijapa thought, 'surely Yorinbo cannot finish these by herself. She has a small appetite, I will have to help her out". So he helped her to eat one big juicy chunk of meat. Then two, and three. The beef stew was really delicious. Ijapa thought surely, the medicine man was in the wrong profession. And then four. Soon, he was no longer counting, until he noticed that there was only one piece left.
The tortoise was shocked at what he had done. He had eaten Yorinbo's potion. But not one to dwell too long on his mistakes, he shrugged it off. Afterall, if the medicine man was as powerful as they say, the remaining one piece of chunky juicy meat should be enough to make Yorinbo pregnant. So he covered the pot and continued on his way.
As the tortoise continued on his way home, his stomach began to ache. His stomach ached so badly, he decided to return to the medicine man to seek some help. By the time he got to the medicine man, his stomach was huge and hard and ached so much that he could hardly talk. But he managed to confess what he had done and plead for help. Unfortunately, the medicine man could not help him and Ijapa the tortoise had to face the consequence of his action.
His stomach continued to grow and ache and after several days of pure agony, Ijapa died.

Once there was a king who had been trying very hard to capture the elephant for his personal collection, but that prize had proved elusive. All the hunters in the kingdom had tried but failed to capture the elephant. So the king promised anyone who could capture the elephant half of his kingdom.
The tortoise heard about this and went to the king to accept the challenge. The king was very amused. "All my hunters have failed to capture the elephant and you think you can succeed where they failed?", the king asked. The tortoise insisted that he was up to the task and promised to deliver the elephant to the king within 48 hours.
The tortoise then dug a big hole, big enough to hold the elephant along a path leading into the village. Then he covered the hole with sticks and leaves so that it was not visible unless you inspected closely. When this was done, the tortoise went to seek out the elephant.
He told the elephant "You know you are the largest animal in the forest and you should be king". The elephant had never considered this before but he thought it was not a bad idea. The tortoise told the elephant that the villagers had decided to make the largest animal their king and were all expecting the elephant to come to the village and be crowned as their king. The more the elephant heard, the more excited he became.
The tortoise adorned the elephant with colorful beads and beating a gong, he sang songs praising the elephant while he led the way into the village. Soon they approached the trap and the tortoise being smaller and lighter walked over the trap. The elephant who was following him fell through the sticks and leaves into the deep hole the tortoise had dug. And that was how the tiny tortoise captured the huge elephant and earned half of the king's kingdom.

This is the story of how the world was created according to the Yorubas of West Africa.
The entire world was filled with water when God decided to create the world. God sent his messenger Obatala to perform the task of creating the world. Obatala brought along his helper, a man named Oduduwa as well as a calabash full of earth and a chicken. Then they began their descent to earth from a rope.
Along the way, they stopped over at a feast where Obatala got drunk from drinking too much palm wine. Oduduwa, finding his master drunk, picked up the calabash and the chicken and continued on the journey.
When Oduduwa reached the earth, he sprinkled earth from the calabash over the water and he dropped the chicken on the earth. The chicken then ran around spreading the earth in every direction he moved until there was land. Oduduwa had now created earth from what used to be water.
Later when Obatala got out of his drunken haze, he discovered that Oduduwa had already performed his task and he was very upset. God however gave him another task to perform ? to create the people that would populate the earth.
And that was how the world was created in a place now called Ile-Ife.

One day, the tortoise was walking along a forest path when he came across a palm tree that had plenty of palm kernel fruits. The tortoise was hungry and the fruits looked juicy and ripe to eat, if only he could reach one of them. He got hold of a long stick and successfully shook some of the fruits off the tree. Unfortunately, before he was able to pick up these fruits from the ground, they rolled into a hole. He shook more fruits off the tree but the same thing happened.
The tortoise then decided to follow the fallen fruits and find them wherever they fell. So he went into the hole, but no could not find any of the fruits. The fruits must have rolled further down the hole, he thought, so he continued down the hole, walking for hours until he dropped right out of the hole into what appeared to be a village square. The tortoise had walked all the way down to the spirit world.
As he looked around, he found a spirit happily chewing on one of his palm kernels, the very last palm kernel. The tortoise exclaimed "those are my palm kernels, you have to give them back". The spirit apologized, he did not know that the fruits belonged to the tortoise, but promised to give the tortoise a special drum in exchange.
The spirit led the tortoise into a building where there were several rows of drums along the wall and asked the tortoise to pick any one. There were drums of all sizes but the tortoise picked a small drum which would be easy to carry since he had a long walk ahead of him.
When the tortoise returned to the forest, he stopped to rest under a tree. While resting, he picked up his new drumstick and beat the drum with it. To his astonishment, a feast appeared before him ? there was a sample of every food that he liked. He ate until he was completely stuffed, then he slept under the tree for he was too full to continue his trip.
The following morning, he woke up, picked up his drum and went to his house. Once there, he sent a message out to all the other animals to come to his house. When all the animals were gathered, the tortoise beat his drum and a huge feast appeared. Everyone was delighted and they all ate and partied until they were all exhausted.
The following day, every animal was at the tortoise's house again. The tortoise beat his drum, a feast appeared and they all ate. They did this everyday. Very soon, the tortoise got tired of beating the drum and appointed the elephant as his official drum beater. However, when the elephant beat the small drum, the drum broke. And there was no feast.
The tortoise would have to return to the spirit world to get a new drum and he immediately set off on this journey. Fortunately, he could remember the exact spot where the palm tree stood. When he got there, he picked up a stick and shook some palm kernels off the tree. The palm kernels fell to the ground and just lay there. The tortoise picked up every one of them and threw them down the hole that led to the spirit world. Then he went after them.
When he arrived in the spirit world, he found the same spirit at the same spot. "You again", he exclaimed. "You have eaten my palm kernels, you have to give them back". "Here are your palm kernels", the spirit said. He had not eaten them as he had just arrived and was only picking them up. The tortoise counted the palm kernels and insisted that some were missing and accused the spirit of lying. He demanded compensation for the missing palm kernels. The spirit again offered to give him a special drum.
This time, the tortoise picked the biggest drum he could find. He needed a drum big enough for the elephant, and the bigger the drum would also produce more food. It took the tortoise several days to drag the big drum back to the surface, so that he was very tired and hungry.
He picked up his new drum stick and beat the drum. Instead of food, a thousand whips appeared. The tortoise alarmed, started to run to his house but the whips followed him and whipped him all the way home.

There was a great King who ruled in the village of Gbogan a long long time ago at a time when animals could talk. The King took very ill for a long period of time and was at the point of death. After several attempts by medicine men from within the kingdom to heal the king failed, "Ikumejakako", the dreaded herbalist who dwelt in the evil forest was consulted. He examining the king and pronounced that the king would have to take a special brew made of elephant body parts or die within seven days.
The King and his chiefs wondered how they would capture a big and dangerous animal like an elephant. The king after consultation with his chiefs made an announcement throughout the kingdom that anyone who would capture an elephant within seven days would get half of the kingdom and his beautiful daughter as a bride.
The tortoise came forward to accept the challenge. He made a request of the King, that a very deep pit be dug and that the pit should be concealed with raffia and mats and that a throne fit for a king should be set on top of the pit. The tortoise made some "akara" balls (bean cakes) and set out into the forest in search of an elephant. The wandered through the forest making enquiries of his fellow animals until the third day when he stumbled on an elephant resting under a tree.
Tortoise: Elephant, what are you doing here, haven't you heard the news?
Elephant: What news? Do not disturb my siesta tortoise, I do not like gossip
Tortoise: I don't believe my eyes, a whole King, resting in the forest under a shade!!
Elephant: A King, what King?
Tortoise: YOU!! The king is dead and the elders have decided to make you king over the people.
Elephant: (roars with laughter)?.you must be a joker tortoise, who would want to make an old ugly elephant like me a king?
Tortoise: There is no time for explanations, preparations are already at an advanced stage in the kingdom for your coronation, we must make haste, see, I have proof (he brought out one of the akara? balls and handed one over to the elephant) This akara is only a small part of the delicacies being prepared for your coronation.
Elephant: (putting the akara into his mouth) Hmmmmm?.this is delicious, really delicious it must be true, lets make haste.
And so the tortoise led the elephant all the way to the village handing out the akara balls to him at intervals and singing popular coronation songs to him all the way.
As the tortoise and the elephant approached the palace, news of the capture of the elephant spread like wild fire, everybody came out of their houses and started following the duo to the palace joyous and joining in tortoise's songs. This all created an atmosphere of festivities reinforcing the belief in the elephant's mind that he was to be made king.
Elephant: Your story must be true, the people are really joyous to see me.
Tortoise: You know I wouldn't lie to you, can't you see them singing that your reign shall be long?
As the throne finally came into sight, the elephant lumbered into it majestically amidst dancing and singing. He sat on the throne and instantly the ground gave way beneath him and he fell into the pit. The king's warriors immediately descended upon him with spears and clubs and butchered him. Once the king had taken a sip of the elephant broth made for him, he became instantly well and fulfilled his promise towards the tortoise.

Once upon a time, there was a famine in the land of Kurumi in southwestern Nigeria, everyone was looking rather thin and unhealthy because very limited food was available. However the tortoise observed that his friend, the dog has looking very rosy and fat. He wondered what the secret of the dog's well being was and decided to pay him a visit and find out:
Tortoise: My good friend, you know we have been friends for a very long time, please tell me the secret of your rosy cheeks and your fat stomach so that I do not die of hunger.
Dog: There is no secret to it my good friend, its just hard work and living a peaceful and serene life.
Tortoise: My friend, do you like as I'm looking haggard, I know that you have found a way to beat this general hunger, please tell me, I can keep a secret.
Dog: Tortoise my friend, I have told you there is no secret or do you think I'd lie to you?
The tortoise wasn't satisfied, he knew that somehow, the dog had managed to find a source of living not known to anyone. So he decided to shadow the dog's movements the next day. He observed the dog leave home very early in the morning with a basket and tailed him all the way to the neighboring village making sure he was at some safe distance behind the dog all the time.
The dog made way to a farm and after looking around to make sure that no one was watching started harvesting yam off the farm into his basket. The tortoise then made his presence known to the Dog:
Tortoise: (shouting) So my friend, this is the secret of your rosy living and you refused to tell me!!
Dog: (Jumping up in fright) Tortoise, why did you follow me here? Well now you know my secret. But if you want to come with me you must come only with me and leave before 6pm when the farmer comes.
Tortoise: I promise! I promise.
So did the tortoise follow the dog each day to the farm and came back with a basket full of yam. However each day the quantity of yam harvested by the tortoise increased and with the increase both the dog and the tortoise had left the farm for home a little later each day than the day before. The dog then decided to caution the tortoise:
Dog: My good friend tortoise, The quantity of yam you take home each day is becoming too much, yesterday, we left for home at 5.45pm, the farmer may catch us and then we are done for.
Tortoise: Don't worry my friend, I'm storing enough yam at home for the rainy day. The farmer will never catch us.
Dog: I don't think you should be greedy; you could get us killed if we harvest too much yam than we can carry easily enough to escape being caught by the farmer.
Tortoise: You dare call me greedy! I don't think it's any of your business how much yam I carry.
So the next day, at 5.30 prompt the dog announced that he was leaving for home. But the tortoise pleaded for some more time to harvest yam. At ten minutes to six the dog put his basket on his head and started heading home. The tortoise noticed this shouted after the dog.
Tortoise: Wait for me, wait for me, I can't carry my basket alone, it's to heavy. I need you to assist me put it on my head.
However the dog refused to listen and made haste to avoid the farmer, then the tortoise started crying and singing asking the dog to come back to help him lift his basket or else he (the tortoise) would start a raucous that will attract he farmer's attention which will mean the death of both of them.
But the dog by then had long gone. The farmer arrived his farm and met the tortoise with a basketful of his yam crying and singing. He promptly descended on the tortoise crying THIEF!! THIEF!!
Immediately a crowd gathered around and the tortoise was brought before the king who decreed that the tortoise be hanged in the market square.

A very long time ago in a little village somewhere in the western part of the country now known as Nigeria, was a king who had three wives but no children. He needed a male heir to succeed him on the throne and he was worried. He decided to seek help from the ifa priest as he was growing old and time was short. The ifa priest came to the palace with his divinity board and cowries with which he consulted the oracle for a solution to the kings dilemma. The oracle revealed that the king would have one son but did not reveal which of the wives would bear the son. The oracle revealed that each would get pregnant after eating from a potion the priest would prepare.
The ifa priest returned with a pot of stew into which he had mixed the potion for the three wives to share. The two older wives however were often wicked to the youngest wife, so they decided to keep the pot of stew for themselves. They believed that if the youngest wife did not eat from the stew, then they could be sure that she was not bearing the only son.
When the youngest wife discovered the empty pot of stew, she started to cry for she had lost the opportunity to bear a child. In desperation, she scraped the pot with her fingers, licking every bit of leftover stew she could get.
Very soon, the two senior wives were spotting rounded bellies. And surprisingly, the third wife too started to exhibit a little bulge. All three wives were pregnant. Time passed and the two senior wives delivered their babies. They both had daughters. They now started to pay attention to the third wife, worried that she might have a son. When she was ready to give birth to her baby, the two senior wives were in attendance to help with the delivery. As soon as she gave birth, the baby boy was immediately taken away and replaced by a stone. The two senior wives quickly raised an alarm for they were shocked by what they had just delivered ? a stone! The stone-mother soon became an outcast as the king sent her away from the palace and nobody in the village would have anything to do with her.
In the meantime, the baby boy had been wrapped in cotton cloth and taken into the forest where he was abandoned under a tree. A medicine man who lived deep in the forest and was out gathering herbs found him and took him home where he raised him into a fine gentleman.
Many years passed and the king died, still without a male heir. The villagers needed to appoint another king but there was no obvious candidate, so the ifa priest was called. The oracle revealed that their king lived deep in the forest and would be found in the home of a powerful medicine man. A delegate was dispatched to go and fetch the would-be king.
The would-be kings? return to the village was welcomed by all but his origin was a mystery to everybody. The oracle had said that the boys mother resides in the village but who could it be? Every woman in the village hoped that she was the mother no matter how unlikely it seemed. The mystery of kings mother needed to be solved before the coronation took place.
The oracle advised that every woman should cook a pot of stew and bring it to the village square. The boy would taste from every pot, and from the taste he would identify his mother. Grand preparations began in every home. Every woman would cook the best pot of stew she had ever cooked in her whole life. A thousand and one ingredients and all manner of spices went into every pot, except for one pot, the one belonging to the village outcast. She lived in a little shack at the edge of the village and she had no money to buy ingredients for a pot of stew. She herself lived on fruits and vegetables that picked from her daily forages into the forest. When it was time for every woman to assemble in the market square, she placed what vegetables she could get into a pot with some water.
The aroma around the market square was overwhelming. There were miles of sizzling, delicious pots of stew. When the king-to-be arrived, everyone fell silent as he made his way from one pot to the other, tasting his way down the line. This went on for the whole day. Exhausted, he reached the last pot behind which sat an unkept woman with ragged clothing. He tasted the content of her pot and burst into song, singing and proclaiming that this was his mother.
Thus, the wicked deed of many years past was uncovered and the two wicked wives were banished from the village.

Three brothers were traveling through the dense rain forest jungle. They had been traveling on foot for almost a full day and night was falling. They needed a suitable place to rest for the night, a place where they would be safe from prowling animals of the night.
They were in luck because before darkness fell, they spotted a little isolated hut in the distance. When they arrived at the hut, they met a kindly old woman who invited them in and offered them a place to spend the night.
The old woman offered them some porridge which she was cooking in an iron pot over some firewood. The brothers declined for they were very exhausted and also did not want to impose on this old woman who living alone, had cooked enough porridge only for one person.
The old woman gave them some mats and showed them into a room where they could lay down and have a good nights rest. Soon, the entire hut was dark and everyone in it was asleep.
Sometime in the night, the youngest of the three brothers woke up and he was very hungry. His older brothers had declined the offer of some supper and he had just gone along, but he was really hungry. So he went out into the kitchen to see if any of the porridge remained and indeed, there was enough porridge in there for one person. It appeared that the old woman had not eaten any of it, she must have been keeping it for the next day. It wouldn't harm anybody if he ate just a little bit of it, and it would certainly do him a lot of good. So he ate a little bit. Then a little bit more, and even more until it was all gone. Realizing his folly, he decided to cover it up and went out to pick some stones to put in the pot. He hoped the old woman would not notice.
The three brothers were up early the next morning to continue on their journey. They bade farewell to the old woman and thanked her for her kindness.
The old woman discovered the stones in her pot soon after the brothers left and immediately set out after them. Even though she was very old, she could move as fast, or maybe even faster than any young man since she was able to catch up with the three young men.
She accused them of stealing her porridge and filling her pot with stones, at which the eldest brother who spoke for them sincerely denied. The old woman though was certain that one of them performed the deed, so she challenged them to take a test. They went to a nearby river which had a log laying across it. Each one of them would walk across the river on the log while singing a song which the woman taught to them. They would each sing this song in Yoruba:Ti m ba je koko arugbo
If I ate the the old woman's cocoyam
Ki okun gbe mi, ki okun la mi
Let the sea take me
Ki okun gbe mi si erigidi ofun
Let the sea take me to
The first two brothers walked confidently across the river singing the song. But the youngest brother was so scared as he walked and sang. His step faltered several times and he eventually fell into the river.

One day, Ijapa the tortoise became determined to make sure that he was the wisest creature in the whole universe. He did not want any other creature challenging his superior wisdom, so he decided to gather all the wisdom in the world for himself. He went round the world collecting all the wisdom into a gourd which he hung around his neck.
When he was satisfied that he was done, he decided to hide the gourd where nobody would have access to it as he was worried that someone may steal from his wisdom.
He decided to hide the gourd at the top of a very tall palm tree. To get to the top, he hung the gourd on his neck and tied a rope around himself and the tree to haul himself up. But the gourd was between him and the tree trunk making it difficult to climb. He would make a little progress and slide right back down. Meanwhile, a snail who was passing by had stopped to watch the tortoise. After watching the tortoise slide down the tree yet again, the snail suggested, "why don't you throw the gourd behind you instead of hanging it in front?"
The tortoise tried this and easily climbed to the top of the tree. Then he realized how futile his effort was. He had collected all the wisdom in the world, yet the snail had proven wiser than him. He threw the gourd unto the ground where it broke into several pieces allowing all the wisdom in it to escape back into the world.
From that day, there was a saying that "the tortoise is wise but the snail is wiser".

Tortoise and Monkey were having a discussion when Monkey began to boast about how he would become king of all the animals saying "Of all the animals, I am most like Man so I should be king". Tortoise replied, "You cannot be king for Lion is king and is very powerful". Monkey replied "Yet, Man has power over Lion and I am most like Man".
Tortoise felt threatened by this claim, not knowing what might happen if Monkey decided to start acting like Man. You see, Tortoise was not powerful, but what he lacked in strength, he made up in wit. And he knew and understood every animal's behavior so that he could outwit them all. But if the monkey was going to start acting in unpredictable ways, he did not want any of that. Tortoise decided to act quickly to put Monkey back in his place.
Tortoise went home to prepare some akara into which he added some fresh honey. When he was done, he put the akara in a basket and took it to Lion's house where he placed it just outside his door and left to hide behind a tree. The akara was warm and its aroma hung in the air so that Lion soon came out to see where it was coming from. He picked one ball of akara and ate it and this akara was sweeter than any akara he had ever eaten before. He ate another one, and then another one until all the akara was gone.
Lion had a huge appetite and this was the best akara he had ever had, so he wanted some more. "Who brought these akara?" he bellowed but there was no answer. He searched the surrounding area and quickly found Tortoise. He grabbed Tortoise by the neck and asked him "How did these akara get here". Tortoise quivered and shook and frighteningly said "I promised not to tell". But Lion insisted he tell "or else?", so Tortoise confessed that it came from Monkey but it is a secret. He told Lion that that was no akara at all but Monkey's feces which he keeps a secret.
Lion immediately headed to Monkey's house. When he saw Monkey, he asked him "Give me sweet feces". Monkey was confused and gave Lion a blank stare. Lion roared at him "I said give me sweet feces!" Monkey was terrified and defecated on the spot. It was not sweet and Lion was mad. He started to beat Monkey while ordering him to make sweet feces until Monkey's bottom was all swollen and red.
Since then, Monkey has shelved his ambition to become king of all the animals.

A long time ago, the Chipmunk looked no different from the Squirrel - he had no stripes. This story tells how he got the distinguishing stripes that we know today.
In the deep jungle where all the animals lived, a season of very heavy rains had caused the forest to grow so thick that it was difficult for the animals to move around the jungle paths. They held a meeting to discuss solutions and decided that every animal that moves on the ground would contribute money to pay for the clearing of the jungle paths. Birds who flew in the sky were exempt from this tax.
The Chipmunk who was tiny in size but disproportionately huge in stubbornness said to the other animals, "I will pay no tax even if it means I never walk on the ground again". So he took to the trees and hopped and jumped from branch to branch without touching the ground. "He's sure to come down sooner or later" said one of the other animals, "then he will have to pay the tax." At this, the animals dispersed and went about their business.
Days passed and the Chipmunk had still not touched the ground. All the other animals, even the famously cunning Tortoise had paid their taxes, but the Chipmunk still would not come down. Some began to feel sorry for him. "Perhaps he has no money, for why else would he suffer and confine himself to a lifetime of hopping on trees?". They said "It is painful to see one of us land animals reduced to such a lifestyle" and they set up a collection fund to help the Chipmunk. They placed a gourd under an Iroko tree where any animal who wished to help the Chipmunk could put some cowries (for that was the currency at the time) until there was enough to pay his tax.
A bird told the Chipmunk about this and the Chipmunk was thoroughly amused. "You mean they have nothing better to do with their money than to pay my tax?" he asked. When night fell, he secretly made his way to the Iroko tree under which the collection gourd lay, climbed down the tree and made away with the gourd.
The following morning when this nasty deed was discovered, the animals were rightly upset. They tried to catch the Chipmunk but none could as the Chipmunk was hopping from tree to tree faster than anyone could catch him. The animals decided to banish the Chipmunk from the jungle for he had misused their trust and kindness.
Now banished from his former home, the Chipmunk went to live amongst people.
Later on, during one of the several meetings that the animals hold in the jungle, somebody asked if anyone knew what the Chipmunk did with the stolen money and it was said "He never put it to any good use but bought new stripes instead". All shook their heads in pity.

There was a man named Kiigbo Kiigba who lived a very long time ago in a little Yoruba village. Like many of the villagers, he was a very hardworking farmer, but he had one major flaw ? he was very stubborn. In fact, his name in Yoruba means "one who does not hear nor accept", since he neither listens to anybody nor consider anybody's suggestions.
Like many villages in the ancient Yoruba world, the village was inhabited by both people and spirits, but to avoid disputes amongst these two groups a law was passed to enable spirits to roam the land on certain days when all people would stay home.
As you might have guessed, Kiigbo Kiigba would not obey this law and would insist on going about his normal business on days elected for spirits. On the first day that people were asked to stay in their homes while spirits were out, Kiigbo Kiigba picked his hoe and cutlass and headed to his farm. Once there he began to till the land in preparation for planting his yams. He had been working for a while when he heard ethereal voices booming out from around him saying "Who are you and what are you doing?". He answered, "I am Kiigbo Kiigba and I am tilling my land". "Alright, we will help you", the voices boomed back and suddenly, hundreds of hoes appeared and started to till the land. In a little jiffy, the entire farm was tilled and Kiigbo went back home.
On the second day that people were asked to stay home while the spirits were out, Kiigbo Kiigba chose to go to his farm to begin planting his yams. He had barely started when the voices boomed out saying "Who are you and what are you doing?". He answered, "I am Kiigbo Kiigba and I am planting my yams". "Alright, we will help you", the answer came and in a jiffy, all the yam seedlings had been planted in neat heaps. Kiigbo went back home.
The third time when people were asked to stay home, Kiigbo Kiigba headed to his farm to harvest his yams. As he started to dig up the first yam, the now familiar voices boomed out saying "Who are you and what are you doing?". He answered, "I am Kiigbo Kiigba and I am harvesting my yams". "Alright, we will help you", the voices said and in a jiffy, all the yams in the farm had been dug up and placed in a big heap.
Kiigbo who just now had the opportunity to look at the one yam he had dug up realized that it was not yet ripe for harvest, and in fact, all the yams that had been dug up were not yet ready for harvest. As a good farmer, Kiigbo Kiigba would have examined a few yams and decided whether to give the yams more time to mature or continue with the harvest. But now, it was too late and his entire crop of yams had been ruined by these helpful spirits.
Kiigbo Kiigba cried "Woe is me" as he hit his head with both hands in sorrow. The spirits asked "Who are you and what are you doing?" He cried, "I am Kiigbo Kiigba and I am hitting my head in sorrow". "Alright, we will help you", the spirits answered and immediately, a hundred hands appeared and started to beat Kiigbo Kiigba on his head.

A long time ago in a little village, there lived a man who had two wives and two daughters ? one daughter from each wife. Bisi was the daughter of the first wife and was only a few months older than the second wife's daughter, Ranti.
The family lived together in the same compound so the girls often played together but Bisi was fond of bullying her younger half-sister just like her mom was fond of being mean to Ranti's mother. Ranti would go crying to her mother and sometimes she would tell her mother how she wished to hurt Bisi just like Bisi had hurt her. But her mother would tell her "never give bad in return for bad, nothing good comes of that". So Ranti remained good and continued to show love in return no matter what Bisi did to her.
One cloudy day, Ranti's mother passed away after a brief illness. Without her mother around, it did not take long for Bisi to crank up her level of meanness towards Ranti. Soon Ranti was doing all of Bisi's chores while Bisi just lazed around, dressed up, ate, slept or visited friends. Ranti would wake up early in the morning before the cocks crowed, place a large clay water pitcher on her head while carrying another in her arms and walk to the river to fetch water for the family's use. It required several trips back and forth before the huge water pot in the compound was filled. Then she would sweep the compound with a broom made of dried palm fronds before peeling yams for breakfast. Her list of chores stretched out until dusk by which time she would be exhausted and just collapse to sleep on her raffia mat. She was too busy to even feel sorry for herself. And everyday, this process was repeated.
One morning as she made her daily trip to the river, she saw an old man sitting by the river bank. He appeared to be covered in sores and he looked really pitiful. Ranti went to meet him "Baba, are you alright, can I get you anything?" she asked. He wanted some water which she gave to him then she washed his sores. "My child, you have a wonderful heart and you deserve wonderful things" he told her. He directed her to go to a garden just beyond the river. He told her she would find two trees ? one with golden fruit which she was not to touch, and the other one with rotten fruit. He told her to take one of the rotten fruits home and once she gets home, she should break open the fruit.
She did as the old man instructed. When she broke the fruit, riches beyond her wildest imagination appeared, filling every inch of her bedroom. When Bisi discovered this, she insisted that Ranti tell her where she got the riches from.
The following morning, after several cock crows, Bisi got up from bed. She hoped the old man would still be at the river as she picked up a pitcher and headed to the river. Luckily for her, he was there looking exactly as Ranti had described him. She went to him and asked "Baba, which way to the magic garden?". The old man showed her and he also told her to pick the rotten fruit, not the golden one. Bisi dumped her pitcher and headed to the garden. She saw the tree with the rotten fruit and the one with the golden fruit and she said to herself "That old man must think I'm stupid. These golden fruit are mine!". She picked a couple of golden fruits, as many as she could carry in her hands and went on her way.
When she got home, she went into her bedroom and closed her doors as she did not want anyone stumbling in to discover her riches. She threw the fruits hard at the floor to break them, but instead of riches, snakes, worms, rodents and all manners of horrible things appeared.

A very long time ago, there was a village where many of the women were barren. They desperately wanted children and decided to ask the spirit that lived inside the big Iroko tree for help.
One by one, they went to visit the Iroko tree to beg the Iroko tree spirit for help. The Iroko tree asked each of the women who showed up what she would give in return for bearing a child. And woman after woman promised the Iroko tree spirit goats, yams, handwoven cloth or whatever it was she sold for a living as many of these women were traders who sold their wares at a weekly market in an open field.
One of the women who was named Oluronbi also approached the Iroko tree for help. She was so desperate for a child that when the Iroko tree spirit asked her what she would give in return for a child, she eagerly offered her first born child.
Before a year ran out, many of the women had given birth to children and returned to the Iroko tree to fulfill their various promises. When it was time for Oluronbi to fulfill her promise, she went to the Iroko tree to plead her case. She could offer the Iroko tree everything, anything else but not her child. But the tree spirit would not be swayed and took the child despite Oluronbi's cries and pleas.
Since then villagers have sang this song as a reminder of the event.Oníkálukú jèjé ewúré
Others offered sheep
Oníkálukú jèjé àgùtàn, àgùtàn bòlòjò
Others offered goats
Olúrónbí èjé omo re
Oluronbi offered her child
Omo re a pón bí epo
Her beautiful child
Olúrónbí ò jo jo
Ìrókò jo jo
[The last two lines are just chorus]

This is a very old story told when the world was young . It is about how Mr.. Ananse the Sly and greedy one among all the animals in the forest outsmarted himself.
As the story goes Ananse, that is still his name , but did you know that his first name was Kweku because he was born on a Wednesday ? One day Ananse collected all the wisdom in the world and decided to keep it all in a large pot for himself. Now he said "I have all the wisdom of the world for myself. At least that was what he thought being such a greedy person."
Kweku Ananse then tied the pot of wisdom around his neck with a strong vine rope and let the pot hang in front of him. But then he was afraid that someone would find the pot of wisdom and steal it.? What shall I do with my pot of wisdom? He thought and thought and at last he said,? I shall hide the pot on top of the the tallest tree in the forest.? So he searched the forest until he found the tallest tree which happened to be the thorny silk cotton tree and brought the pot of wisdom to the tree. While Ananse was trying to climb the thorny silk cotton tree his son was watching him.? Father,? he said,? "What are you doing" "Well" said Ananse , I have in this clay pot all the wisdom of the world and I am going to hang it on the top of the tallest tree away from everybody , then I will be the wisest in the whole wide world." "I have an idea." said his son " Why not hang the pot behind you instead of in front of you. Then you will be able to climb the tree?. Well the sly one Ananse hung the pot behind him and to his surprise; he was able to climb to the top of the tree with his pot.
Finally Ananse sat on a branch of the tree holding the pot of wisdom. "I thought I had all the wisdom in the world" He thought to himself.
"I thought I had it all in my pot but my own son has wisdom not in my pot." Then he made a statement that we still use today. No one-person can have all the wisdom in the world."On his way down he dropped the pot and it smashed into many pieces and scatted all the wisdom all over the world.

One of the few animals that was able to outsmart Kweku Ananse, Kweku being his first name because he was born on a Wednesday was Adun, the plain's Baboon.
And although this happened a very long long time ago, Baboon and Ananse are still enemies and it is said that one of the reasons Baboon scratches a lot is that he often feels Kweku Ananse crawling all over his skin and in the hairs on his back. He just cannot stand Kweku Ananse.
Well, as I said, it happened so long ago that most of the details have been forgotten and except the old people, few really remember what exactly happened between Kweku Ananse and Adun the Baboon.
A very, very long time ago as the story goes, Kweku Ananse and Adun, the Baboon were the best of friends and went everywhere together. Most of the time Ananse wanted to just hang on the hairs of Baboon and Baboon treated Ananse with a great deal of respect and love. It is said that they were closer than brothers. All the animals admired them because they were happy and protected each other. They ate together and played together each day among the trees and at night. Baboon would find a large tree to make a bed with some leaves while Ananse just hung from the largest branch on the tree away from all predators.
Some folks said it was a symbiotic existence, a sort of mutual admiration society that benefits each other.
One very fine day as they were foraging for food they came upon a marsh and across the marsh was a banana tree.
Now, everyone knows how much Baboon likes to feed on ripe bananas. And so they crossed the marsh by stepping over the rocks where the Frog and the Turtle rest to soak the sunlight each day.
"Who goes there?" croaked Frog.
"No one but me," answered Baboon.
"And, who is this with you?" replied Frog
"Well," said Baboon. "This is Kweku Ananse. He is my best friend."
"And what are you two doing here?" asked Frog.
"Yes," added Turtle. "Why are you disturbing us here? We need our rest in the sun, you know."
'sorry, Frog and sorry, Turtle. We don't mean to disturb the two of you." They replied.
"Then," shouted Frog, "then why are you crossing the marsh?"
"We have seen a banana tree with its ripe bananas on the other side. We all know that Baboon just loves bananas. And we hope to get some for ourselves," they said.
Frog and Turtle said, "OK you may cross over. For all we care you can take the whole tree away."
"Thank you, thank you, thank you," said Baboon. "And, thank you, again, on behalf of my friend Kweku Ananse. We are going to share the bananas. This is because bananas are not part of Frog's and Turtle's diet. And so the two old friends took the bananas back presumably to share. Well, that is there the trouble started. Seeing that the bananas were all yellow and ripe Kweku Ananse wanted them all for himself. Kweku Ananse did not want the share the bananas and after heated arguments about how to share Ananse came up with the idea of keeping the ripened bananas while Baboon kept the stump of the plant. Kweku Ananse picked his and kept the ripe bananas because he wanted to eat those delicious bananas right away without sharing it with his friend Adun. Ananse made a big mistake, which he did not know because he was thinking how smart he was. He did not know that Baboon knew all about how banana plants grew. So Baboon took his stump home, planted it, and waited patiently.
Time went by and one day when Ananse visited Adun he saw a very healthy banana tree growing in Baboon's yard. It was laden with ripe and juicy bananas. When he asked where it came from Baboon explained that unknown to Ananse, banana trees are peculiar and special in that without seed they just grow new shoots from the roots called rhizomes, Adzanka as the Ga people call it. And that was the secret to the banana tree that Kweku Ananse did not know and had to learn the hard way.
Now Baboon had all the bananas he could eat each time the fruit matured. So Baboon refused to share the fruits of the banana tree with Ananse. And up to now all we can say is that it cured Kweku Ananse from eating bananas. He learned a lesson.

There was a king who had a daughter named Bola. Bola had never spoken a word and the king was very distressed. He had done all that he could to make Bola speak, powerful medicine men had brewed her all kinds of herbs and recited incantations but nothing worked. The king promised his daughter and half his kingdom to anybody who can make his daughter speak.
Tortoise heard of this reward and set out to get it. He bought a bottle of honey and placed it by a bush near where Bola lived while he hid himself. When Bola came by and saw the bottle of honey, she put her hand in it. Immediately Tortoise jumped out of his hiding place and grabbed Bola by the hand. "Thief!" he cried, 'so it is you who steal my honey and eat it."
"I?" said Bola. "I have stolen your honey to eat? I?"
Tortoise then tied Bola with a rope and started to lead her back to the palace singing,
Bola stole honey to eat
Kayin, Kayin
Bola is a cunning cheat
Kayin, Kayin
Bola is a shameless thief
Kayin, Kayin
To this, Bola sang in response,
Into the wood of the elephant I went with the elephant
Kayin, Kayin
Into the wood of the buffalo I went with the buffalo
Kayin, Kayin
And Tortoise has come to accuse me of stealing honey to eat
Kayin, Kayin
When they arrived at the palace, the king and all who were gathered were amazed to hear Bola sing. "My daughter, who has never been heard to speak, speaks today!" the king cried.
As he had promised he gave half his kingdom to Tortoise and Tortoise married the king's daughter.

There was a man who had two wives. The senior wife was called the Iyale while the junior wife was called the Iyawo. The senior wife, the Iyale was very mean to the Iyawo. She made life very hard for the Iyawo such that the Iyawo never had enough food to feed her children or nice clothes to wear. The nicer the Iyawo was, the meaner the Iyale became.
One day, the junior wife, the Iyawo needed to get some firewood. Since the Iyale would not help her watch her baby she had to take her baby into the forest with her. She placed her baby under a tall tree while she went to gather some wood.
She finished gathering her firewood and returned to get her baby but the baby was gone. "Yey!" she cried. "Ta lo gbo mo mi o", "Who took my baby?" she screamed. She ran back and forth looking for her baby, crying and yelling but couldn't find her baby anywhere.
Then she looked up, and she saw a bird perched high up in the tree, holding her baby in its clutches. "You bird up in tree, give me back my baby" she called to the bird. The bird threw down a bundle and the Iyawo quickly ran to get it. But it was not her baby. It was a bag of coral beads.
She once again appealed to the bird "I want my baby, what will I do with coral beads. Please give me back my baby!". The bird sang to her saying that corals are worth more than her baby but the Iyawo would not hear of this. She insisted on her baby.
The bird threw down another bundle and the Iyawo ran to get it. But again, it was not her baby, it was a bag of gold. She cried to the bird "I want my baby, what will I do with gold? Please give me back my baby!"
This scene was repeated again with the bird throwing down precious stones, but the Iyawo refused to take these in place of her baby.
Finally, the bird flew down and placed the baby on the ground. "Here's your baby. And as you have proven not to be a greedy person, you can have all that I have offered you". Now the Iyawo had not only her baby, but also the bag of corals, the bag of gold and the precious stones.
When the Iyale saw her come home with all these items, she demanded to know how the Iyawo had come into possession of such expensive goods. The Iyawo told her story and the Iyale decided to get her own goods too since she could not be satisfied with sharing these with the Iyawo. She needed to have more than the Iyawo did.
The following morning, the mean senior wife, the Iyale, took her baby into the forest and laid the baby under the same tall tree from which the Iyawo's baby had been taken. Then she went away to make as if she was gathering firewood. When she got back, her baby was gone.
She looked up and saw her baby in the clutches of the bird perched high up on the tree. "Give me corals, gold and precious stones. And give me back my baby", she called to the bird. The bird threw down a bundle. The Iyale eagerly ran towards this bundle, but instead of coral beads or gold or precious stones, she found stones.
"You stupid bird, give me corals, gold and precious stones. And give me back my baby" she called to the bird again. This time the bird threw down a bag of rubbish. The Iyale screamed at the bird demanding corals, gold and precious stones. But this time, the bird threw down a bag containing the bones of the Iyale's baby.

A farmer and his wife had one son named Ajadi. They were not rich but they never lacked for food for no matter how bad times got, they always managed to grow enough food to feed their small family with a little left over to trade.
Ajadi's parents looked forward to the day he would join them in their farming profession. With more hands on the farm, they could increase the output from their land. And more importantly, Ajadi could learn how to fend for himself in the way his parents had before him. But alas, to the parents dismay, Ajadi announced that he wished to become a hunter. "A hunter?" his father exclaimed. "A hunter's life is unpredictable, one day you find food and for many more, you may find nothing" he added. Ajadi's mother added, "It's risky, you never know what dangerous animals you may run into". But Ajadi's heart was set on being a hunter and he told his parents how he felt. He thought he would be happier as a hunter than as a farmer. Even though his parents were unhappy about his decision, they decided to support him however they could and even helped him purchase his new hunting gear.
So Ajadi became a hunter and a skillful and successful hunter he was. No day passed that he did not bring back some game which his mother could add into their soup pot for the evening. But one day came when his luck seemed to have deserted him. His hunting skills and prowess seemed to be of no use to him as there was just no game to be found in the forest. He roamed the forest for days, going ever deeper into the thick, dark forest but still, he found no animal to kill. Then he spotted a bird, a tiny bird perched on a low branch. Normally, he would have ignored an animal so small as there was too little meat to be found in it, but this day was different. Ajadi was desperate and he was determined to make his first kill in days. He took aim at the bird, getting ready to fell it from the branch when the bird began to sing.
Tín tín to jantó
Mo gbé ye kékeré tó l?óun ó pa mí
(I hear a bird saying he would kill me)
Tín tín to jantó
The bird sang so beautifully. Ajadi had never heard such beautiful music in his entire life and he was almost certain that his parents hadn't either. He had to get that bird home to his parents. Being the skillful hunter that he was, he caught the bird without hurting it and put it in his sack which he slung over his shoulders and headed home.
When Ajadi got home, he removed the bird from his sack and the bird immediately began to sing.
Tín tín to jantó
Mo gbé ye kékeré tó l?óun ó pa mí
Tín tín to jantó
Ajadi's father and mother had indeed never heard such beautiful music and they broke out into a dance. They danced and danced and then danced some more until Ajadi put the bird back into his sack. When Ajadi's father got his breath back, he had an idea. The king of their village had been in a depressed state for several years. The best poets, musicians, dancers and jesters had come from far away villages to cheer him up but to no avail. Maybe this tiny bird would do the trick and make their king smile.
So off to the palace, Ajadi and his father set off. When the got to the palace, the guards stopped them at the gate. "What is your business here", they asked. "We would like to see the king" the farmer replied. "Is the king expecting you?" the guards asked. The farmer answered, "No, but?". "Then you cannot see him" the guards interrupted. The farmer pleaded but one of the guards told him, "If I were you, I would go away for the king is in a foul mood and you do not want to risk his anger". The farmer started to turn back but Ajadi brought the bird out of his sack and the guards began to dance.
Ajadi and his father went into the palace where they found the king scowling on his throne. "Who let you in here?", the king bellowed. Ajadi brought out the bird and it began to sing.
Tín tín to jantó
Mo gbé ye kékeré tó l?óun ó pa mí
Tín tín to jantó
The king got up and began to dance. All those in attendance began to dance. The king's wives came out of their rooms to find out what was happening, and they all began to dance. All the princes and princesses began to dance. The mood in the palace which had been somber for years was miraculously transformed. Everyone danced until they were weary and could dance no more.
The sun would soon set and Ajadi and his father wanted to go back home. But the king did not want them to take the bird away. He was so happy that he offered the farmer half of his kingdom in exchange for the bird. And that was how the farmer and his wife, through their son Ajadi the hunter, became rich.

This story took place a long time ago at a time when fire was scarce and only those who were very skilled at controlling fire had it whenever they wanted. Others who needed fire would go to such people to tap some fire from them.
But there was a little village where they only man who could control fire was also a monster. He had huge teeth and he looked horrible. Whenever people came to his house to tap fire, they would laugh at him and he would get so angry that he would sometimes eat them up.
In the same village, there lived a man who had seven children. The family needed fire, so the man sent his first child to get fire from the monster.
When the child arrived at the monsters house, the following exchange too place [as a song in Yoruba]:
Monster: Kí lo wá se
Child: Mo wá mú ná, èru bà mí
Monster: Èru kí ni?
Child: Èru eyín re
Ó wá fi s?énu káló
Monster: What do you want?
C: I'm here to tap fire but I am afraid
M: Afraid of what?
C: Afraid of your teeth
Then he swallowed the child
The father waited for his first child and after a while, he sent his second child to go after the first one. When the second child arrived at the monsters house, the same exchange took place: Monster: Kí lo wá se
Child: Mo wá mú ná, èru bà mí
Monster: Èru kí ni?
Child: Èru eyín re
Ó wá fi s?énu káló
Then the father sent his third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh child, one after the other but none of them returned. So the father went in search of his children.
When he got to the monsters house, he asked for his children and the monster told him that his children had been naughty. The monster said they had come to look at his teeth rather than get fire which is why he ate them. When the father heard this, he brought out his axe, killed the monster and slit his belly where he rescued all seven children.

Olómúroro was a greedy monster who preyed on little children. He was not a good looking creature but children did not seem scared of him because he sang so sweetly. He would approach the children with song and then take their food away.
Tojo was one of the little children that Olómúroro preyed upon. Toyo's father was a farmer and his mother was a trader. Every morning as soon as the first cock crowed, Tojo's father would leave for the farm. Tojo's mother would make him some akara for breakfast and some fufu and egusi soup for lunch before leaving for the market where she sold produce from their farm.
Every morning, as Tojo got ready to eat his breakfast, Olómúroro would appear singing and Tojo would respond:
Olómúroro má a wolè
Téré nò nò jantakò
Olómúroro, welcome (watch your step)
Olómúroro would ask:
Ìyá re nkó?
Téré nò nò jantakò
Where is your mother?
Tojo would answer:
I`yá mi òrájà lo sójà
Téré nò nò jantakò
My mother the trader has gone to the market
Olómúroro would ask:
Bàbá re nkó?
Téré nò nò jantakò
Where is your father?
The boy, Tojo would answer:
Bàbá mi òlókò lo sókò
Téré nò nò jantakò
My father the farmer has gone to the farm
The song would continue with Olómúroro asking the boy where his food was and Tojo would show the creature where his mother kept his breakfast and lunch.
Olómúroro would then gobble up all of Tojo's food leaving not even a tiny bit for Tojo to eat.
The days went by and Tojo got thinner and thinner. His parents noticed and they were worried. Tojo looked like he needed some more food so his mother increased the number of akara she made him for breakfast. She also gave him a bigger bowl of fufu and egusi for lunch, but still Tojo got thinner. The parents were baffled because everyday, they found Tojo's breakfast and lunch bowls licked clean and yet Tojo was getting thinner. If Tojo got any thinner, he would become very sick.
By now, the parents suspected something else was eating Tojo's food and they needed to put a stop to it. The following morning, Tojo's mother put his food at the top of a high shelf where Tojo could not reach it and she went to the market as usual. Tojo's father too picked his cutlass and hoe and set out for the farm. But this time, he turned back home to hide in a place where he could watch Tojo and the bowls at the top of the shelf.
Olómúroro arrived as usual and Tojo's father watched the exchange between Olómúroro and Tojo.
This time when Olómúroro asked Tojo where his food was, he pointed to the top of the shelf. Olómúroro asked Tojo to step on a stool to get the bowls of food. But Tojo still could not reach the bowls. Olómúroro asked him to use a long stick to get the bowls so Tojo got a long stick and poked at the bowls. The bowls came clattering down and shattered on the floor.
As Olómúroro bent his head down to lick the food off the floor, Tojo's father leapt out with his cutlass and killed Olómúroro. That was how hundreds of children who had been getting thin mysteriously started to grow and get chubby again.

A long time ago in the village of Ipetumodu, there lived a poor woman . This woman was so poor that she did not have any soup for her eba. The eba is a starchy paste made from cassava flour and it is rather unappetizing to eat all by itself. Across the street from this poor woman lived another woman who cooked egusi soup everyday.
One day, as the poor woman was sitting down to her only meal for the entire day, a small bowl of eba, the aroma from her neighbors cooking wafted down through her window.
"Perhaps she will be kind enough to let me have a little soup for my eba" she thought. So she took her bowl of eba and headed over to her neighbor who was busy stirring a big pot of egusi soup.
"Please, may I have a little soup for my eba", the poor woman asked.
The woman stirring the egusi soup looked up to see her raggedy-looking neighbor and replied, "If you can't make your own egusi soup, then you don't deserve to have any."
The poor woman went back to her own hut and sat outside her doorsteps where the aroma from her neighbors egusi was very strong. She would scoop some eba with her hands, inhale a big dose of egusi soup aroma while she swallowed the lump of eba.
The egusi woman, seeing this destitute neighbor eating her soup's aroma got very angry. She ran out and yelled at the woman 'stop eating the aroma from my soup!" But the poor woman did not stop, she kept inhaling the aroma from the egusi soup while she ate her eba. She found the aroma from the soup very satisfying.
Everyday, whenever the rich aroma of egusi soup wafted into the poor womans hut, she would quickly make a little bowl of eba and go outside to inhale the pleasant aroma. The egusi woman was getting very furious and she decided to take her case to the oba, the king of their village.
"This woman steals the aroma from my egusi to eat her eba. She must be punished.", the egusi woman told the oba. The oba heard the story and agreed that the poor woman should indeed be punished for stealing soup aroma and he ordered the egusi woman to carry out the punishment.
'she stole your aroma therefore you shall flog her shadow?, the oba told the egusi woman. "You shall flog her shadow forty times" and she was given the big stick with which she would carry out her justice.
The egusi woman, wielding her big stick to beat the poor woman's shadow felt very foolish. She felt so foolish that she asked the poor woman for forgiveness and offered to give her real egusi soup from that day on.

Back in the days when Tortoise could talk and the animals ruled the forest, famines were frequent and those animals who could not survive the drought would wither and die. There was one such period when the tortoise had become lean. He had survived as long as he could on his wit but he soon began to suffer like all the other animals as every available source of food disappeared.
Hah, not every source. Tortoise perked up for he had noticed that Bird still had flesh on her skin beneath her feathers. "I must find out where she gets her food", Tortoise thought.
As soon as Tortoise had the opportunity to talk to Bird, he demanded that Bird take him to his food source. Bird denied having a food source but Tortoise threatened to reveal to all the other animals that Bird was holding out on them, so Bird agreed to take Tortoise to her food source. "If I show you where I get my food, you must promise never to tell anyone", Bird told Tortoise and Tortoise readily agreed. Bird lent Tortoise some feathers and they flew together over many rivers until they reached the ocean. There they saw the Water Goddess.
The water goddess was upset with Bird for bringing Tortoise, but nevertheless, she gave Tortoise a magic igbako. "You must not reveal the magic of the igbako to anyone outside your immediate family", the water goddess warned Tortoise. "Reveal secrets? Me? Never!" Tortoise said. "Okay then, ask the igbako what its duty is", the water goddess replied before she disappeared into the depths of the sea.
"Igbako, what is your duty?" Tortoise asked the igbako and it responded,
I make huge lumps of iyan,
I make huge lumps of eba,
such that the whole world eats
and yet leaves leftovers.
At this, iyan, eba and various soups, meats and fruits appeared. Tortoise immediately began to attack the food, but no matter how much he ate or how fast he ate, he could not finish all the food. After he recovered from his binge, he flew back home with the igbako.
When he got home, he called his entire family together and brought out the igbako. "Igbako, what is your duty?" Tortoise asked, and the igbako replied,
I make huge lumps of iyan,
I make huge lumps of eba,
such that the whole world eats
and yet leaves leftovers.
The Tortoise family feasted for the entire day on the food that appeared. They ate until they could eat no more. By this time, Tortoise was thinking of the fame the igbako could bring him, he needed to show off his magic to the entire animal kingdom.
So Tortoise went to the palace and told the Oba he had a solution to the famine. He convinced the Oba to send for every animal in the forest and soon, all the animals were assembled at the Oba's palace.
Tortoise posed on stage in front of all the animals while he asked the igbako "Igbako, what is your duty?". The igbako replied as usual,
I make huge lumps of iyan,
I make huge lumps of eba,
such that the whole world eats
and yet leaves leftovers.
A huge feast appeared and all the animals ate until the sun set and they had to go to sleep. The following day, Tortoise asked the igbako its duty and the feast was repeated. Everyday, the animals ate while they chanted praises of the tortoise. But they were just getting used to eating everyday when the igbako broke and would not respond to Tortoise's question anymore.
Tortoise promised to get another igbako, so he borrowed some more feathers from Bird and flew over several rivers till he reached the ocean where the water goddess lived.
"Great One", he called out to the water goddess. "My igbako broke and I have come to ask for a new one".
"Perhaps you worked the igbako too hard feeding the entire kingdom", the water goddess said.
"Oh no, it was just me and my family. I have no idea how it broke but please give me a new one lest my family starve to death", Tortoise pleaded.
The water goddess gave Tortoise another igbako, but this time, it was a tiny igbako. "Remember, share this only with your immediate family", the water goddess reminded him. "Of course, I would never do otherwise", Tortoise promised and the water goddess returned to the sea.
"Igbako, what is your duty?", Tortoise asked the tiny igbako. The tiny igbako replied,
I make tiny lumps of iyan,
I make tiny lumps of eba,
such that the whole world eats
but is never full.
Miniature pieces of food appeared, perhaps better suited for an ant. Tortoise nibbled at the little pieces and before he knew it, all the food was gone. He called out for the water goddess but she did not answer. So he picked up his feathers and the tiny igbako and flew back home.
At home, his family gathered as he asked the igbako, "igbako, what is your duty?". The tiny igbako replied,
I make tiny lumps of iyan,
I make tiny lumps of eba,
such that the whole world eats
but is never full.
The Tortoise family nibbled at what little food there was, but no one was satisfied. Tortoise said, "When I had plenty of food, everyone ate of it. Now I have food that does not satisfy, everyone must share in the dissatisfaction". So he set off for the palace and asked the Oba to assemble all the animals.
When all the animals were gathered, anticipating a huge feast, Tortoise brought out his tiny igbako and said, "Igbako, what is your duty?". The igbako replied,
I make tiny lumps of iyan,
I make tiny lumps of eba,
such that the whole world eats
but is never full.
The animals grumbled as they struggled for the little pieces of food that appeared. "Ask igbako to make more food!", they yelled. And Tortoise asked igbako to do its duty again and again until the tiny igbako broke. And there was still not enough food. The animals were angry. "Go back and get another one", they yelled at the tortoise.
For the third time, Tortoise flew with borrowed feathers to the ocean over many rivers to see the water goddess.
He cried out to her "Help me, my family starves, igbako is broken again. Please give me another one."
The water goddess came out and asked him, "Did you break your promise and share the igbako with others?". "Oh no", replied Tortoise, "I would never do that. I kept my promise, yet igbako broke."
"Well then, I'll give you something else this time, a rod built so strong, it shall not break" said the water goddess. She gave Tortoise a rod and returned into the ocean.
"Rod, what is your duty?" asked Tortoise to which the rod replied,
I whip the disobedient
I whip the greedy
Till their skin is white with pain.
And the rod began to whip Tortoise.
"I shared my big igbako, I shared my small igbako, I shall not keep this rod for myself", Tortoise said to himself and he picked the rod and his borrowed feathers and flew back home. When he got home, he gathered his family in the room and asked the rod, "Rod, what is your duty?". The rod replied,
I whip the disobedient
I whip the greedy
Till their skin is white with pain.
The entire Tortoise family received a good whipping. After that, Tortoise took the rod to the palace where all the animals were waiting for him after their disappointing feast.
"Rod, what is your duty", Tortoise asked. Again the rod replied,
I whip the disobedient
I whip the greedy
Till their skin is white with pain.
Every animal present received a whipping as they fled back into the forest.

If you live in the rain forest climates of West Africa, you will be very familiar with the buzz of the mosquito in your ears on hot humid evenings. Even if there's only one mosquito and only one person in an area as large as a football field, the mosquito always seems to find that person's ear and buzz in it. If you've slapped yourself in the face because of a mosquito, you know what I'm talking about. Here's the story that explains the mosquito's attraction to the ear.
A very long time ago when Ear was a beautiful woman and ready for marriage, there were several suitors wooing her. There were big creatures, there were small creatures. There were fast and sleek creatures and there were slow ones. But they all professed their love for Ear and demonstrated their skills ? and there was such an impressive array of skills that Ear had a difficult time making a decision. Then along came mosquito.
"I would like you to be my wife", proposed Mosquito.
Ear was so offended by this affront. "Look around you!" she cried. "Of all the people and creatures in the whole world, what makes you think I can entertain such a thought?" Ear was distressed. "Marry you?!!" she continued. "You will be dead before the week is over. You're not strong, you're weak and I will never marry you!"
Ear was exhausted from this tirade and she fell into her seat, fanning herself vigorously like she was trying to get any image of Mosquito out of her head. Meanwhile, Mosquito was really hurt by all that Ear said. It was very embarrassing to be talked to like that in front of all the other creatures who were whispering to each other and giggling. Apparently, they all agreed with Ear. "Dead before the week is over," thought Mosquito as he slunk away. "We'll see about that."
And from that day forward, whenever Mosquito sees Ear, he flies up to her and says "Emi re, mi o ti ku", which in English means "Here I am, I am not dead."
But who did Mosquito eventually marry? And how did she get attached to either side of Head? That's another story I would like to hear.

Tortoise and Hare were chatting when Tortoise declared, "I bet I can beat you in a race." Hare was stunned for a minute. He wasn't sure he heard Tortoise correctly. "Did you say something about a race?" Hare asked. Tortoise elaborated, "I challenge you to a race and I want all the animals present to witness your defeat."
Hare started to laugh, "This is the most ridiculous thing I have ever heard" he said. "It will take you many years to cover the distance I can run in one day. It is silly to race against you. Everyone knows that I will win."
But Tortoise pleaded with Hare until Hare agreed to the race and a date was agreed upon.
The day of the race came and several animals came to witness the start of the race. There were also several animals waiting at the finish line.
The race began and Hare bounded away, eager to get the race over with. He still thought it was ridiculous to be competing against Tortoise in a race. But what Hare didn't know was that Tortoise had positioned his cousins along the race path while Tortoise himself waited near the finish line.
As Hare turned the corner around the forest path, he saw Tortoise walking ahead of him. "This is impossible!" he exclaimed. "How did you get here?" he asked.
"Though I walk slowly, when I run fast, I run so fast you don't even see me pass you" Tortoise replied.
"Impossible!" muttered Hare as he ran past Tortoise.
Hare started to run faster. As he turned another corner in the forest path, he again saw Tortoise walking ahead of him. "You've got to be kidding me!" said Hare as he approached Tortoise. "How did you get in front of me again?" Hare asked.
"Though I walk slowly, when I run fast, I run so fast you don't even see me pass you" Tortoise replied as he slowly walked along.
"Impossible!" muttered Hare as he ran past Tortoise.
Hare started to run even faster. Again, he turned a corner and saw Tortoise walking ahead of him. "Oh no! This cannot be happening" thought Hare as he ran past Tortoise. He wasn't going to stop to talk anymore. He tried to run even faster but he couldn't because he was tired from running so fast.
Then, as he turned the corner to run the last stretch of the race, he saw Tortoise walking across the finish line ahead of him. "Impossible! Impossible!!" shouted Hare as Tortoise was declared the winner of the race.

There was a man with three sons and a precious cow. The man was was very proud of his cow because she gave birth to a healthy calf every year. One day, the man asked his eldest son to take the cow grazing. The son took the cow to the fields where green grass grew and then to the water-hole for a nice long drink.Later, the man asked his cow, "Cow, did you have enough to eat?".
"Hmm", the cow replied. "Your wicked son took me to the wilderness where no grass grows. Then he tied me up and went to sleep."
The man was angry with his eldest son and sent him away from home.
The eldest son wandered through green meadows, parched lands and waded across little ponds until he arrived at a farmhouse. There he met a kind farmer who taught him how to farm in both dry and wet seasons.
The farmer told the boy, "One day I will have to send you back to your father, so you can teach him how to farm. Then he can depend less on that wicked cow."
Meanwhile, the boy's father had called his second son. "Go and graze the cow. She must be well fed and washed." The second son took the cow to the green fields where she grazed. Then he gave her a bath and tied her to a tree to dry. As he waited for the cow to dry, he dozed off.The father came by to see how his cow was doing. "Have you eaten?", the man asked the cow.
"Hmm", the cow replied. "Your wicked son took me to the wilderness where no grass grows. Then he tied me up and went to sleep."
The man was again very angry. He grabbed a big stick and woke his son up. Then he chased him away.
The second son wandered for days until he came upon the house of a blacksmith. The blacksmith taught him how to make hoes and matchets for farming as well as bows and arrows for hunting. The blacksmith told the boy, "One day, I will have to send you back to your father so you can teach him how to make these tools. Then he can depend less on that wicked cow."
The father had now called his third and favorite son. "Go and graze the cow. Be sure to take good care of her for it will break my heart to send you away like your brothers" he warned his son.
The son took the cow to the green fields where she grazed and bathed. Then he tied her to a tree to dry. Just then the father arrived.
"Cow", he asked. "Did you have enough to eat?"
"Hmm", the cow replied. "Your favorite son is just as wicked as his brothers. He took to the wilderness where no grass grows. Then he tied me up here to die."
The man was very sad to hear this but he wouldn't listen to his son's pleas. He sent him away just like his brothers before him.The third son wandered for many days until he reached the house of a great scholar. There he learned to read and write.
The father who was now alone took the cow grazing. He took the cow to a pasture where she ate plenty of lush grass and drank plenty of water while the man dozed under a tree. When the man woke up, he asked the cow, "Are you full?"
The cow laughed. "You're a hyprocrite like your sons. You took me into the wilderness. You gave me no food and no water. Then you ask me if I'm full?!"
The man couldn't believe what he heard. "Ahh, you've been lying to me all along", he wailed. "I sent my sons away because of your lies." He beat the cow with a stick then he tied her up to a tree and left her to die.
The man wandered from village to village looking for his sons but with no luck. After many years, he returned home a sad and tired old man.
One market day, he decided to go to the market to buy himself some food. When he got to the edge of the market, he was tired that he slumped and fainted. People ran to help him. The noise attracted everyone. Everyone, including the eldest son who had come to sell some of his farm produce, the second son who had come to sell the tools he made and the third son who had accompanied his teacher to the market to buy some food. The boys noticed that that was their father who had fainted and at the same time, they found one another. They were overjoyed.When the old man was revived, he wept with joy at seeing his sons once again. He asked for their forgiveness and pleaded with them to come back home. "My eyes were opened long ago. You are more precious to me than a cow.

In the olden days all the stories which men told were stories of Nyankupon, the chief of the gods. Spider, who was very conceited, wanted the stories to be told about him.
Accordingly, one day he went to Nyankupon and asked that, in future, all tales told by men might be Anansi stories, instead of Nyankupon stories. Nyankupon agreed, on one condition. He told Spider (or Anansi) that he must bring him three things: the first was a jar full of live bees, the second was a boa-constrictor, and the third a tiger. Spider gave his promise.
He took an earthen vessel and set out for a place where he knew were numbers of bees. When he came in sight of the bees he began saying to himself, "They will not be able to fill this jar"—"Yes, they will be able"—"No, they will not be able," until the bees came up to him and said, "What are you talking about, Mr. Anansi?" He thereupon explained to them that Nyankupon and he had had a great dispute. Nyankupon had said the bees could not fly into the jar—Anansi had said they could. The bees immediately declared that of course they could fly into the jar—which they at once did. As soon as they were safely inside, Anansi sealed up the jar and sent it off to Nyankupon.
Next day he took a long stick and set out in search of a boa-constrictor. When he arrived at the place where one lived he began speaking to himself again. "He will just be as long as this stick"—"No, he will not be so long as this"—"Yes, he will be as long as this." These words he repeated several times, till the boa came out and asked him what was the matter. "Oh, we have been having a dispute in Nyankupon's town about you. Nyankupon's people say you are not as long as this stick. I say you are. Please let me measure you by it." The boa innocently laid himself out straight, and Spider lost no time in tying him on to the stick from end to end. He then sent him to Nyankupon.
The third day he took a needle and thread and sewed up his eye. He then set out for a den where he knew a tiger lived. As he approached the place he began to shout and sing so loudly that the tiger came out to see what was the matter. "Can you not see?" said Spider. "My eye is sewn up and now I can see such wonderful things that I must sing about them." 'sew up my eyes," said the tiger, "then I too can see these surprising sights." Spider immediately did so. Having thus made the tiger helpless, he led him straight to Nyankupon's house. Nyankupon was amazed at Spider's cleverness in fulfilling the three conditions. He immediately gave him permission for the future to call all the old tales Anansi tales.

There once lived, in Fanti-land, a man named Father Anansi. He possessed all the wisdom in the world. People came to him daily for advice and help.
One day the men of the country were unfortunate enough to offend Father Anansi, who immediately resolved to punish them. After much thought he decided that the severest penalty he could inflict would be to hide all his wisdom from them. He set to work at once to gather again all that he had already given. When he had succeeded, as he thought, in collecting it, he placed all in one great pot. This he carefully sealed, and determined to put it in a spot where no human being could reach it.
Now, Father Anansi had a son, whose name was Kweku Tsin. This boy began to suspect his father of some secret design, so he made up his mind to watch carefully. Next day he saw his father quietly slip out of the house, with his precious pot hung round his neck. Kweku Tsin followed. Father Anansi went through the forest till he had left the village far behind. Then, selecting the highest and most inaccessible-looking tree, he began to climb. The heavy pot, hanging in front of him, made his ascent almost impossible. Again and again he tried to reach the top of the tree, where he intended to hang the pot. There, he thought, Wisdom would indeed be beyond the reach of every one but himself. He was unable, however, to carry out his desire. At each trial the pot swung in his way.
For some time Kweku Tsin watched his father's vain attempts. At last, unable to contain himself any longer, he cried out: "Father, why do you not hang the pot on your back? Then you could easily climb the tree."
Father Anansi turned and said: "I thought I had all the world's wisdom in this pot. But I find you possess more than I do. All my wisdom was insufficient to show me what to do, yet you have been able to tell me." In his anger he threw the pot down. It struck on a great rock and broke. The wisdom contained in it escaped and spread throughout the world.

Near Anansi's miserable little hut there was a fine palace where lived a very rich man called Nothing. Nothing and Anansi proposed, one day, to go to the neighbouring town to get some wives. Accordingly, they set off together.
Nothing, being a rich man, wore a very fine velvet cloth, while Anansi had a ragged cotton one. While they were on their way Anansi persuaded Nothing to change clothes for a little while, promising to give back the fine velvet before they reached the town. He delayed doing this, however, first on one pretext, then on another—till they arrived at their destination.
Anansi, being dressed in such a fine garment, found no difficulty in getting as many wives as he wished. Poor Nothing, with his ragged and miserable cloth, was treated with great contempt. At first he could not get even one wife. At last, however, a woman took pity on him and gave him her daughter. The poor girl was laughed at very heartily by Anansi's wives for choosing such a beggar as Nothing appeared to be. She wisely took no notice of their scorn.
The party set off for home. When they reached the cross-roads leading to their respective houses the women were astonished. The road leading to Anansi's house was only half cleared. The one which led to Nothing's palace was, of course, wide and well made. Not only so, but his servants had strewn it with beautiful skins and carpets, in preparation for his return. Servants were there, awaiting him, with fine clothes for himself and his wife. No one was waiting for Anansi.
Nothing's wife was queen over the whole district and had everything her heart could desire, Anansi's wives could not even get proper food; they had to live on unripe bananas with peppers. The wife of Nothing heard of her friends' miserable state and invited them to a great feast in her palace. They came, and were so pleased with all they saw that they agreed to stay there. Accordingly, they refused to come back to Anansi's hut.
He was very angry, and tried in many ways to kill Nothing, but without success. Finally, however, he persuaded some rat friends to dig a deep tunnel in front of Nothing's door. When the hole was finished Anansi lined it with knives and broken bottles. He then smeared the steps of the palace with okro to make them very slippery, and withdrew to a little distance.
When he thought Nothing's household was safely in bed and asleep, he called to Nothing to come out to the courtyard and see something. Nothing's wife, however, dissuaded him from going. Anansi tried again and again, and each time she bade her husband not to listen. At last Nothing determined to go and see this thing. As he placed his foot on the first step, of course he slipped, and down he fell into the hole. The noise alarmed the household. Lights were fetched and Nothing was found in the ditch, so much wounded by the knives that he soon died. His wife was terribly grieved at his untimely death. She boiled many yams, mashed them, and took a great dishful of them round the district. To every child she met she gave some, so that the child might help her to cry for her husband. This is why, if you find a child crying and ask the cause, you will often be told he is "crying for nothing."

There had been a long and severe famine in the land where Anansi lived. He had been quite unable to obtain food for his poor wife and family. One day, gazing desperately out to sea, he saw rising from the midst of the water, a tiny island with a tall palm-tree upon it. He determined to reach this tree—if any means proved possible—and climb it, in the hope of finding a few nuts to reward him. How to get there was the difficulty.
This, however, solved itself when he reached the beach, for there lay the means to his hand, in the shape of an old broken boat. It certainly did not look very strong, but Anansi decided to try it.
His first six attempts were unsuccessful—a great wave dashed him back on the beach each time he tried to put off. He was persevering, however, and at the seventh trial was successful in getting away. He steered the battered old boat as best he could, and at length reached the palm-tree of his desire. Having tied the boat to the trunk of the tree—which grew almost straight out of the water—he climbed toward the nuts. Plucking all he could reach, he dropped them, one by one, down to the boat. To his dismay, every one missed the boat and fell, instead, into the water until only the last one remained. This he aimed even more carefully than the others, but it also fell into the water and disappeared from his hungry eyes. He had not tasted even one and now all were gone.
He could not bear the thought of going home empty-handed, so, in his despair, he threw himself into the water, too. To his complete astonishment, instead of being drowned, he found himself standing on the sea-bottom in front of a pretty little cottage. From the latter came an old man, who asked Anansi what he wanted so badly that he had come to Thunder's cottage to seek it. Anansi told his tale of woe, and Thunder showed himself most sympathetic.
He went into the cottage and fetched a fine cooking-pot, which he presented to Anansi—telling him that he need never be hungry again. The pot would always supply enough food for himself and his family. Anansi was most grateful, and left Thunder with many thanks.
Being anxious to test the pot at once, Anansi only waited till he was again seated in the old boat to say, "Pot, pot, what you used to do for your master do now for me." Immediately good food of all sorts appeared. Anansi ate a hearty meal, which he very much enjoyed.
On reaching land again, his first thought was to run home and give all his family a good meal from his wonderful pot. A selfish, greedy fear prevented him. "What if I should use up all the magic of the pot on them, and have nothing more left for myself! Better keep the pot a secret—then I can enjoy a meal when I want one." So, his mind full of this thought, he hid the pot.
He reached home, pretending to be utterly worn out with fatigue and hunger. There was not a grain of food to be had anywhere. His wife and poor children were weak with want of it, but selfish Anansi took no notice of that. He congratulated himself at the thought of his magic pot, now safely hidden in his room. There he retired from time to time when he felt hungry, and enjoyed a good meal. His family got thinner and thinner, but he grew plumper and plumper. They began to suspect some secret, and determined to find it out. His eldest son, Kweku Tsin, had the power of changing himself into any shape he chose; so he took the form of a tiny fly, and accompanied his father everywhere. At last, Anansi, feeling hungry, entered his room and closed the door. Next he took the pot, and had a fine meal. Having replaced the pot in its hiding-place, he went out, on the pretence of looking for food.
As soon as he was safely out of sight, Kweku Tsin fetched out the pot and called all his hungry family to come at once. They had as good a meal as their father had had. When they had finished, Mrs. Anansi—to punish her husband—said she would take the pot down to the village and give everybody a meal. This she did—but alas! in working to prepare so much food at one time, the pot grew too hot and melted away. What was to be done now? Anansi would be so angry! His wife forbade every one to mention the pot.
Anansi returned, ready for his supper, and, as usual, went into his room, carefully shutting the door. He went to the hiding-place—it was empty. He looked around in consternation. No pot was to be seen anywhere. Some one must have discovered it. His family must be the culprits; he would find a means to punish them.
Saying nothing to any one about the matter, he waited till morning. As soon as it was light he started off towards the shore, where the old boat lay. Getting into the boat, it started of its own accord and glided swiftly over the water—straight for the palm-tree. Arrived there, Anansi attached the boat as before and climbed the tree. This time, unlike the last, the nuts almost fell into his hands. When he aimed them at the boat they fell easily into it—not one, as before, dropping into the water. He deliberately took them and threw them over-board, immediately jumping after them. As before, he found himself in front of Thunder's cottage, with Thunder waiting to hear his tale. This he told, the old man showing the same sympathy as he had previously done.
This time, however, he presented Anansi with a fine stick and bade him good-bye. Anansi could scarcely wait till he got into the boat so anxious was he to try the magic properties of his new gift. 'stick, stick," he said, "what you used to do for your master do for me also." The stick began to beat him so severely that, in a few minutes, he was obliged to jump into the water and swim ashore, leaving boat and stick to drift away where they pleased. Then he returned sorrowfully homeward, bemoaning his many bruises and wishing he had acted more wisely from the beginning.

In a town not very far from Anansi's home lived a great king. This king had three beautiful daughters, whose names were kept a secret from everybody except their own family. One day their father made a proclamation that his three daughters would be given as wives to any man who could find out their names. Anansi made up his mind to do so.
He first bought a large jar of honey, and set off for the bathing-place of the king's daughters. Arrived there, he climbed to the top of a tree on which grew some very fine fruit. He picked some of this fruit and poured honey over it. When he saw the princesses approaching he dropped the fruit on the ground and waited. The girls thought the fruit dropped of its own accord, and one of them ran forward to pick it up. When she tasted it, she called out to her sisters by name to exclaim on its sweetness. Anansi dropped another, which the second princess picked up—she, in her turn, calling out the names of the other two. In this fashion Anansi found out all the names.
As soon as the princesses had gone Anansi came down from the tree and hurried into the town. He went to all the great men and summoned them to a meeting at the King's palace on the morrow.
He then visited his friend the Lizard, to get him to act as herald at the Court next day. He told Lizard the three names, and the latter was to sound them through his trumpet when the time came.
Early next morning the King and his Court were assembled as usual. All the great men of the town appeared, as Anansi had requested. Anansi stated his business, reminding the King of his promise to give his three daughters to the man who had found out their names. The King demanded to hear the latter, whereupon Lizard sounded them on his trumpet.
The King and courtiers were much surprised. His Majesty, however, could not break the promise he had made of giving his daughters to the man who named them. He accordingly gave them to Mr. Lizard. Anansi was very angry, and explained that he had told the names to Lizard, so that he ought to get at least two of the girls, while Lizard could have the third. The King refused. Anansi then begged hard for even one, but that was also refused. He went home in a very bad temper, declaring that he would be revenged on Lizard for stealing his wives away.
He thought over the matter very carefully, but could not find a way of punishing Lizard. At last, however, he had an idea.
He went to the King and explained that he was setting off next morning on a long journey. He wished to start very early, and so begged the King's help. The King had a fine cock, which always crowed at daybreak to waken the King if he wished to get up early. Anansi begged that the King would command the cock to crow next morning, that Anansi might be sure of getting off in time. This the King readily promised.
As soon as night fell Anansi went by a back way to the cock's sleeping-place, seized the bird quickly, and killed it. He then carried it to Lizard's house, where all were in bed. There he quietly cooked the cock, placed the feathers under Lizard's bed, and put some of the flesh on a dish close to Lizard's hand. The wicked Anansi then took some boiling water and poured it into poor Lizard's mouth, thus making him dumb.
When morning came, Anansi went to the King and reproached him for not letting the cock crow. The King was much surprised to hear that it had not obeyed his commands.
He sent one of his servants to find and bring the cock to him, but, of course, the servant returned empty-handed. The King then ordered them to find the thief. No trace of him could be found anywhere. Anansi then cunningly said to the King: "I know Lizard is a rogue, because he stole my three wives from me. Perhaps he is the thief." Accordingly, the men went to search Lizard's house.
There, of course, they found the remnants of the cock, cooked ready to eat, and his feathers under the bed. They questioned Lizard, but the poor animal was unable to reply. He could only move his head up and down helplessly. They thought he was refusing to speak, so dragged him before the King. To the King's questions he could only return the same answer, and his Majesty got very angry. He did not know that Anansi had made the poor animal dumb. Lizard tried very hard to speak, but in vain.
He was accordingly judged guilty of theft, and as a punishment his wives were taken away from him and given to Anansi.
Since then lizards have always had a way of moving their heads helplessly backward and forward, as if saying, "How can any one be so foolish as to trust Anansi?"

There had been a great famine in the land for many months. Meat had become so scarce that only the rich chiefs had money enough to buy it. The poor people were starving. Anansi and his family were in a miserable state.
One day, Anansi's eldest son—Kweku Tsin—to his great joy, discovered a place in the forest where there were still many animals. Knowing his father's wicked ways, Kweku told him nothing of the matter. Anansi, however, speedily discovered that Kweku was returning loaded, day after day, to the village. There he was able to sell the meat at a good price to the hungry villagers. Anansi immediately wanted to know the secret—but his son wisely refused to tell him. The old man determined to find out by a trick.
Slipping into his son's room one night, when he was fast asleep, he cut a tiny hole in the corner of the bag which Kweku always carried into the forest. Anansi then put a quantity of ashes into the bag and replaced it where he had found it.
Next morning, as Kweku set out for the forest, he threw the bag, as usual, over his shoulder. Unknown to him, at each step, the ashes were sprinkled on the ground. Consequently, when Anansi set out an hour later he was easily able to follow his son by means of the trail of ashes. He, too, arrived at the animals' home in the forest, and found Kweku there before him. He immediately drove his son away, saying that, by the law of the land., the place belonged to him. Kweku saw how he had been tricked, and determined to have the meat back.
He accordingly went home—made a tiny image and hung little bells round its neck. He then tied a long thread to its head and returned toward the hunting-place.
When about half-way there, he hung the image to a branch of a tree in the path, and hid himself in the bushes near by—holding the other end of the thread in his hand.
The greedy father, in the meantime, had killed as many animals as he could find, being determined to become rich as speedily as possible. He then skinned them and prepared the flesh—to carry it to the neighbouring villages to sell. Taking the first load, he set off for his own village. Half-way there, he came to the place where the image hung in the way. Thinking this was one of the gods, he stopped. As he approached, the image began to shake its head vigorously at him. He felt that this meant that the gods were angry. To please them, he said to the image, "May I give you a little of this meat?" Again the image shook its head. "May I give you half of this meat?" he then inquired. The head shook once more. "Do you want the whole of this meat?" he shouted fiercely. This time the head nodded, as if the image were well pleased. "I will not give you all my meat," Anansi cried. At this the image shook in every limb as if in a terrible temper. Anansi was so frightened that he threw the whole load on the ground and ran away. As he ran, he called back, "To-morrow I shall go to Ekubon—you will not be able to take my meat from me there, you thief."
But Kweku had heard where his father intended to go next day—and set the image in his path as before. Again Anansi was obliged to leave his whole load—and again he called out the name of the place where he would go the following day.
The same thing occurred, day after day, till all the animals in the wood were killed. By this time, Kweku Tsin had become very rich—but his father Anansi was still very poor. He was obliged to go to Kweku's house every day for food.
When the famine was over, Kweku gave a great feast and invited the entire village. While all were gathered together, Kweku told the story of his father's cunning and how it had been overcome. This caused great merriment among the villagers. Anansi was so ashamed that he readily promised Kweku to refrain from his evil tricks for the future. This promise, however, he did not keep long.

There came once such a terrible famine in the land that a grain of corn was worth far more than its weight in gold. A hungry spider was wandering through the forest looking for food. To his great joy he found a dead antelope.
Knowing that he would not be allowed to reach home in safety with it, he wrapped it up very carefully in a long mat and bound it securely.
Placing it on his head, he started for home. As he went, he wept bitterly, telling every one that this was his dead grandfather's body. Every one he met sympathized heartily with him.
On his way he met the wolf and the leopard. These two wise animals suspected that this was one of Spider's tricks. They knew that he was not to be trusted. Walking on a little way, they discussed what they could do to find out what was in the bundle.
They agreed to take a short cut across the country to a tree which they knew Cousin Spider must pass. When they reached this tree they hid themselves very carefully behind it and waited for him.
As he passed the place they shook the tree and uttered frightful noises. This so frightened Mr. Spider that he dropped his load and ran away.
The two gentlemen opened the bundle and, to their great joy, discovered the flesh of the antelope in it. They carried it off to their own home and began to prepare supper.
When Mr. Spider recovered from his fear he began to wonder who could have been at the tree to make the noises. He decided that his enemies must be Wolf and Leopard. He made up his mind he would get his meat back from them.
He took a small lizard and filed his teeth to fine, sharp points. He then sent him to spy upon the wolf and leopard—by begging fire from them. He was to get the fire and quench it as soon as he left their cottage. He could then return and ask a second time. If they asked him questions, he must smile and show his teeth.
The lizard did as he was told, and everything turned out just as Spider had expected. Wolf and Leopard eagerly asked the lizard where he had had his teeth filed so beauti- fully. He replied that "Filing Spider" had done it for him.
Wolf and Leopard discussed the matter and decided to have their teeth filed in the same way. They could then easily break the bones of their food.
Accordingly, they went to the house of the disguised spider and asked him to make their teeth like Lizard's. Spider agreed, but said that, to do it properly, he would first have to hang them on a tree. They made no objection to this.
When he had them safely hung, Spider and his family came and mocked them. Spider then went to their cottage and brought away the body of the antelope. The whole village was invited to the feast, which was held in front of the two poor animals on the tree. During this festival every one made fun of the wolf and leopard.
Next morning White Ant and his children passed the place on their way to some friends. Mr. Leopard begged them to set him and his friend free. White Ant and his family set to work, destroyed the tree and set them at liberty. Leopard and Wolf promised the ants that on their return they would spread a feast for them.
Unfortunately, Spider heard the invitation and made up his mind to benefit by it. On the third day (which was the very time set by the wolf and leopard) Spider dressed up his children like the ants. They set out, singing the ants' chorus, in order to deceive Leopard.
Wolf and Leopard welcomed them heartily and spread a splendid feast for them, which the spiders thoroughly enjoyed.
Soon after their departure the real ants arrived. The two hosts, thinking these must be Spider and his family, poured boiling water over them and killed them all except the father.
White Ant, on reaching home again, in great anger, vowed that he would never again help any one. He would take every opportunity to harm property. From that day to this white ants have been a perfect pest to man.

A hard-working squirrel had, after much labour, succeeded in cultivating a very fine farm. Being a skilful climber of trees, he had not troubled to make a roadway into his farm. He used to reach it by the trees.
One day, when his harvests were very nearly ripe, it happened that Spider went out hunting in that neighbourhood. During his travels, he arrived at Squirrel's farm. Greatly pleased at the appearance of the fields, he sought for the roadway to it. Finding none, he returned home and told his family all about the matter. The very next day they all set out for this fine place, and set to work immediately to make a road. When this was completed Spider—who was very cunning—threw pieces of earthenware pot along the pathway. This he did to make believe that his children had dropped them while working to prepare the farm.
Then he and his family began to cut down and carry away such of the corn as was ripe. Squirrel noticed that his fields were being robbed, but could not at first find the thief. He determined to watch. Sure enough Spider soon reappeared to steal more of the harvest. Squirrel demanded to know what right he had on these fields. Spider immediately asked him the same question. "They are my fields," said Squirrel. "Oh, no! They are mine," retorted Spider. "I dug them and sowed them and planted them," said poor Squirrel. "Then where is your roadway to them?" said crafty Spider. "I need no roadway. I come by the trees," was Squirrel's reply. Needless to say, Spider laughed such an answer to scorn, and continued to use the farm as his own.
Squirrel appealed to the law, but the court decided that no one had ever had a farm without a road leading to it, therefore the fields must be Spider's.
In great glee Spider and his family prepared to cut down all the harvest that remained. When it was cut they tied it in great bundles and set off to the nearest market-place to sell it. When they were about half-way there, a terrible storm came on. They were obliged to put down their burdens by the roadside and run for shelter. When the storm had passed they returned to pick up their loads.
As they approached the spot they found a great, black crow there, with his broad wings outspread to keep the bundles dry. Spider went to him and very politely thanked him for so kindly taking care of their property. "Your property!" replied Father Crow. "Who ever heard of any one leaving bundles of corn by the roadside? Nonsense! These loads are mine." So saying, he picked them up and, went off with them, leaving Spider and his children to return home sorrowful and empty-handed. Their thieving ways had brought them little profit.
Why We See Ants Carrying Bundles As Big As Themselves
KWEKU ANANSI and Kweku Tsin—his son—were both very clever farmers. Generally they succeeded in getting fine harvests from each of their farms. One year, however, they were very unfortunate. They had sown their seeds as usual, but no rain had fallen for more than a month after and it looked as if the seeds would be unable to sprout.
Kweku Tsin was walking sadly through his fields one day looking at the bare, dry ground, and wondering what he and his family would do for food, if they were unable to get any harvest. To his surprise he saw a tiny dwarf seated by the roadside. The little hunchback asked the reason for his sadness, and Kweku Tsin told him. The dwarf promised to help him by bringing rain on the farm. He bade Kweku fetch two small sticks and tap him lightly on the hump, while he sang:
"O water, go up! O water, go up, And let rain fall, and let rain fall!"
To Kweku's great joy rain immediately began to fall, and continued till the ground was thoroughly well soaked. In the days following the seeds germinated, and the crops began to promise well.
Anansi soon heard how well Kweku's crops were growing—whilst his own were still bare and hard. He went straightway to his son and demanded to know the reason. Kweku Tsin, being an honest fellow, at once told him what had happened.
Anansi quickly made up his mind to get his farm watered in the same way, and accordingly set out toward it. As he went, he cut two big, strong sticks, thinking, "My son made the dwarf work with little sticks. I will make him do twice as much with my big ones." He carefully hid, the big sticks, however, when he saw the dwarf coming toward him. As before, the hunchback asked what the trouble was, and Anansi.told him. "Take two small sticks, and beat me lightly on the hump," said the dwarf. "I will get rain for you."
But Anansi took his big sticks and beat so hard that the dwarf fell down dead. The greedy fellow was now thoroughly frightened, for he knew that the dwarf was jester to the King of the country, and a very great favourite of his. He wondered how he could fix the blame on some one else. He picked up the dwarf's dead body and carried it to a kola-tree. There he laid it on one of the top branches and sat down under the tree to watch.
By and by Kweku Tsin came along to see if his father had succeeded in getting rain for his crops. "Did you not see the dwarf, father?" he asked, as he saw the old man sitting alone. "Oh, yes!" replied Anansi; "but he has climbed this tree to pick kola. I am now waiting for him." "I will go up and fetch him," said the young man—and immediately began to climb. As soon as his head touched the body the latter, of course, fell to the ground. "Oh! what have you done, you wicked fellow?" cried his father. "You have killed the King's jester!" "That is all right," quietly replied the son (who saw that this was one of Anansi's tricks). "The King is very angry with him, and has promised a bag of money to any one who would kill him. I will now go and get the reward." "No! No! No!" shouted Anansi. "The reward is mine. I killed him with two big sticks. I will take him to the King." "Very well," was the son's reply. "As you killed him, you may take him."
Off set Anansi, quite pleased with the prospect of getting a reward. He reached the King's court, only to find the King very angry at the death of his favourite. The body of the jester was shut up in a great box and Anansi was condemned—as a punishment—to carry it on his head for ever. The King enchanted the box so that it could never be set down on the ground. The only way in which Anansi could ever get rid of it was by getting some other man to put it on his head. This, of course, no one was willing to do.
At last, one day, when Anansi was almost worn out with his heavy burden, he met the Ant. "Will you hold this box for me while I go to market and buy some things I need badly?" said Anansi to Mr. Ant. "I know your tricks, Anansi," replied Ant. "You want to be rid of it." "Oh, no, indeed, Mr. Ant," protested Anansi. "Indeed I will come back for it, I promise."
Mr. Ant, who was an honest fellow, and always kept his own promises, believed him. He took the box on his head, and Anansi hurried off. Needless to say, the sly fellow had not the least intention of keeping his word. Mr. Ant waited in vain for his return—and was obliged to wander all the rest of his life with the box in his head. That is the reason we so often see ants carrying great bundles as they hurry along.

Egya Anansi was a very skilful farmer. He, with his wife and son, set to work one year to prepare a farm, much larger than any they had previously worked. They planted in it yams, maize, and beans—and were rewarded by a very rich crop. Their harvest was quite ten times greater than any they had ever had before. Egya Anansi was very well pleased when he saw his wealth of corn and beans.
He was, however, an exceedingly selfish and greedy man, who never liked to share anything—even with his own wife and son. When he saw that the crops were quite ripe, he thought of a plan whereby he alone would profit by them. He called his wife and son to him and spoke thus: "We have all three worked exceedingly hard to prepare these fields. They have well repaid us. We will now gather in the harvest and pack it away in our barns. When that is done, we shall be in need of a rest. I propose that you and our son should go back to our home in the village and remain there at your ease for two or three weeks. I have to go to the coast on very urgent business. When I return we will all come to the farm and enjoy our well-earned feast."
Anansi's wife and son thought this a very good, sensible plan, and at once agreed to it. They went straight back to their village, leaving the cunning husband to start on his journey. Needless to say he had not the slightest intention of so doing.
Instead, he built himself a very comfortable hut near the farm—supplied it with all manner of cooking utensils, gathered in a large store of the corn and vegetables from the barn, and prepared for a solitary feast. This went on for a fortnight. By that time Anansi's son began to think it was time for him to go and weed the farm, lest the weeds should grow too high. He accordingly went there and worked several hours on it. While passing the barn, he happened to look in. Great was his surprise to see that more than half of their magnificent harvest had gone. He was greatly disturbed, thinking robbers had been at work, and wondered how he could prevent further mischief.
Returning to the village, he told the people there what had happened, and they helped to make a rubber-man. When evening came they carried the sticky figure to the farm, and placed it in the midst of the fields, to frighten away the thieves. Some of the young men remained with Anansi's son to watch in one of the barns.
When all was dark, Egya Anansi (quite unaware of what had happened) came, as usual, out of his hiding-place to fetch more food. On his way to the barn. he saw in front of him the figure of a man, and at first felt very frightened. Finding that the man did not move, however, he gained confidence and went up to him. "What do you want here?" said he. There was no answer. He repeated his question with the same result. Anansi then became very angry and dealt the figure a blow on the cheek with his right hand. Of course, his hand stuck fast to the rubber. "How dare you hold my hand!" he exclaimed. "Let me go at once or I shall hit you again." He then hit the figure with his left hand, which also stuck. He tried to disengage himself-by pushing against it with his knees and body, until, finally, knees, body, hands, and head were all firmly attached to the rubber-man. There Egya Anansi had to stay till daybreak, when his son came out with the other villagers to catch the robber. They were astonished to find that the evil-doer was Anansi himself. He, on the other hand, was so ashamed to be caught in the act of greediness that he changed into a spider and took refuge in a dark corner of the ceiling lest any one should see him. Since then spiders have always been found in dark, dusty corners, where people are not likely to notice them.
Anansi and the Blind Fisherman
ANANSI, in his old age, became a fisherman. Very soon after that his sight began to fail. Finally, he grew quite blind. However, still being very strong, he continued his fishing—with the help of two men. The latter were exceedingly kind to him, and aided him in every possible way. They led him, each morning, to the beach and into the canoe. They told him where to spread his net and when to pull it in. When they returned to land they told him just where and when to step out, so that he did not even get wet.
Day after day this went on, but Anansi—instead of being in the least grateful to them—behaved very badly. When they told him where to spread his net, he would reply sharply, "I know. I was just about to put it there." When they were directing him to get out of the boat, he would say, "Oh, I know perfectly well we are at the beach. I was just getting ready to step out."
This went on for a long time, Anansi getting ruder and ruder to his helpers every day, until they could bear his treatment no longer. They determined when opportunity offered to punish him for his ingratitude.
The next day, as usual, he came with them to the beach. When they had got the canoe ready, they bade him step in. "Do you think I am a fool?" said he. "I know the canoe is there." They made no answer, but got in and patiently pulled toward the fishing-place. When they told him where to spread his net, he replied with so much abuse that they determined, there and then, to punish him.
By this time the canoe was full of fish, so they turned to row home. When they had gone a little way they stopped and said to him, "Here we are at the beach." He promptly told them that they were very foolish—to tell him a thing he knew so well. He added many rude and insulting remarks, which made them thoroughly angry. He then jumped proudly out, expecting to land on the beach. To his great astonishment he found himself sinking in deep water. The two men rowed quickly away, leaving him to struggle.
Like all the men of that country he was a good swimmer, but, of course, being blind, he was unable to see where the land lay. So he swam until he was completely tired out—and was drowned.
Adzanumee and Her Mother
THERE once lived a woman who had one great desire. She longed to have a daughter—but alas! she was childless. She could never feel happy, because of this unfulfilled wish. Even in the midst of a feast the thought would be in her mind—"Ah! if only I had a daughter to share this with me!"
One day she was gathering yams in the field, and it chanced that she pulled out one which was very straight and well shaped. "Ah!" she thought to herself, "if only this fine yam were a daughter, how happy I should be!" To her astonishment the yam answered, "If I were to become your daughter, would you promise never to reproach me with having been a yam?" She eagerly gave her promise, and at once the yam changed into a beautiful, well-made girl. The woman was overjoyed and was very kind to the girl. She named her Adzanumee. The latter was exceedingly useful to her mother. She would make the bread, gather the yams, and sell them at the market-place.
She had been detained, one day, longer than usual. Her mother became impatient at her non-appearance and angrily said, "Where can Adzanumee be? She does not deserve that beautiful name. She is only a yam."
A bird singing near by heard the mother's words and immediately flew off to the tree under which Adzanumee sat. There he began to sing:
"Adzanumee! Adzanumee!
Your mother is unkind—she says you are only a yam,
You do not deserve your name!
Adzanumee! Adzanumee!"
The girl heard him and returned home weeping. When the woman saw her she said, "My daughter, my daughter! What is the matter?" Adzanumee replied:
"O my mother! my mother!
You have reproached me with being a yam.
You said I did not deserve my name.
O my mother! my mother!"
With these words she made her way toward the yam-field. Her mother, filled with fear, followed her, wailing:
"Nay, Adzanumee! Adzanumee!
Do not believe it—do not believe it.
You are my daughter, my dear daughter
Adzanumee!"
But she was too late. Her daughter, still singing her sad little song, quickly changed back into a yam. When the woman arrived at the field there lay the yam on the ground, and nothing she could do or say would give her back the daughter she had desired so earnestly and treated so inconsiderately.

There had been another great famine throughout the land. The villagers looked thin and pale for lack of food. Only one family appeared healthy and well. This was the household of Anansi's cousin.
Anansi was unable to understand this, and felt sure his cousin was getting food in some way. The greedy fellow determined to find out the secret.
What had happened was this: Spider's cousin, while hunting one morning, had discovered a wonderful stone. The stone lay on the grass in the forest and ground flour of its own accord. Near by ran a stream of honey. Kofi was delighted. He sat down and had a good meal. Not being a greedy man, he took away with him only enough for his family's needs.
Each morning he returned to the stone and got sufficient food for that day. In this manner he and his family kept well and plump, while the surrounding villagers were starved and miserable-looking.
Anansi gave him no peace till he promised to show him the stone. This he was most unwilling to do—knowing his cousin's wicked ways. He felt sure that when Anansi saw the stone he would not be content to take only what he needed. However, Anansi troubled him so much with questions that at last he promised. He told Anansi that they would start next morning, as soon as the women set about their work. Anansi was too impatient to wait. In the middle of the night he bade his children get up and make a noise with the pots as if they were the women at work. Spider at once ran and wakened his cousin, saying, "Quick! It is time to start." His cousin, however, saw he had been tricked, and went back to bed again, saying he would not start till the women were sweeping. No sooner was he asleep again than Spider made his children take brooms and begin to sweep very noisily. He roused Kofi once more, saying, "It is time we had started." Once more his cousin refused to set off—saying it was only another trick of Spider's. He again returned to bed and to sleep. This time Spider slipped into his cousin's room and cut a hole in the bottom of his bag, which he then filled with ashes. After that he went off and left Kofi in peace.
When morning came the cousin awoke. Seeing no sign of Spider he very gladly set off alone to the forest, thinking he had got rid of the tiresome fellow. He was no sooner seated by the stone, however, than Anansi appeared, having followed him by the trail of ashes.
"Aha!" cried he. "Here is plenty of food for all. No more need to starve." "Hush," said his cousin. "You must not shout here. The place is too wonderful. Sit down quietly and eat."
They had a good meal, and Kofi prepared to return home with enough for his family. "No, no!" cried Anansi. "I am going to take the stone." In vain did his friend try to overcome his greed. Anansi insisted on putting the stone on his head, and setting out for the village.
'spider, Spider, put me down, said the stone.
The pig came and drank and went away,
The antelope came and fed and went away:
Spider, Spider, put me down."
Spider, however, refused to listen. He carried the stone from village to village selling flour, until his bag was full of money. He then set out for home.
Having reached his hut and feeling very tired he prepared to put the stone down. But the stone refused to be moved from his head. It stuck fast there, and no efforts could displace it. The weight of it very soon grew too much for Anansi, and ground him down into small pieces, which were completely covered over by the stone. That is why we often find tiny spiders gathered together under large stones.

A man in one of the villages had a very beautiful daughter. She was so lovely that people called her "Morning Sunrise." Every young man who saw her wanted to marry her. Three, in particular, were very anxious to have her for their wife. Her father found it difficult to decide among them. He determined to find out by a trick which of the three was most worthy of her.
He bade her lie down on her bed as if she were dead. He then sent the report of her death to each of the three lovers, asking them to come and help him with her funeral.
The messenger came first to "Wise Man." When he heard the message, he exclaimed, "What can this man mean? The girl is not my wife. I certainly will not pay any money for her funeral."
The messenger came next to the second man. His name was "Wit." The latter at once said, "Oh dear, no! I shall not pay any money for her funeral expenses. Her father did not even let me know she was ill." So he refused to go.
"Thinker," the third young man—when he received the message—at once got ready to start. "Certainly I must go and mourn for Morning Sunrise," said he. "Had she lived, surely she would have been my wife." So he took money with him and set out for her home.
When he reached it her father called out, "Morning Sunrise, Morning Sunrise. Come here. This is your true husband."
That very day the betrothal took place, and soon after the wedding followed. "Thinker" and his beautiful wife lived very happily together.
Why the Sea-turtle When Caught Beats Its Breast With Its Forelegs
MANY centuries ago, the people of this earth were much troubled by floods. The sea used at times to overflow its usual boundaries and sweep across the low, sandy stretches of land which bordered it. Time and again this happened, many lives being lost at each flood. Mankind was very troubled to find an escape from this oft-repeated disaster. He could think of no way of avoiding it.
Fortunately for him the wise turtle came to his help. "Take my advice," said she, "and plant rows of palms along the sea-coast. They will bind the sand together and keep it from being washed so easily away." He did so, with great success. The roots of the palms kept the sand firmly in its place. When the time came again for the sea to overflow, it washed just to the line of trees and came no farther. Thus many lives were saved annually by the kind forethought of the turtle.
In return—one would think—mankind would protect and cherish this poor animal. But no! Each time a turtle comes to the seashore to lay her eggs among the sand, she is caught and killed for the sake of her flesh. It is the thought of the ingratitude of mankind to her, which makes her beat her breast with her forelegs when she is caught. She seems to be saying, "Ah! this is all the return I get for my kindness to you."

The famine had lasted nearly three years. Kweku Tsin, being very hungry, looked daily in the forest in the hope of finding food. One day he was fortunate enough to discover three palm-kernels lying on the ground. He picked up two stones with which to crack them. The first nut, however, slipped when he hit it, and fell into a hole behind him. The same thing happened to the second and to the third. Very much annoyed at his loss, Kweku determined to go down the hole to see if he could find his lost nuts.
To his surprise, however, he discovered that this hole was really the entrance to a town, of which he had never before even heard. When he reached it he found absolute silence everywhere. He called out, "Is there nobody in this town?" and presently heard a voice in answer. He went in its direction and found an old woman sitting in one of the houses. She demanded the reason of his appearance—which he readily gave.
The old woman was very kind and sympathetic, and promised to help him. "You must do exactly as I tell you," said she. "Go into the garden and listen attentively. You will hear the yams speak. Pass by any yam that says, 'Dig me out, dig me out!' But take the one that says, 'Do not dig me out!' Then bring it to me."
When he brought it, she directed him to remove the peel from the yam and throw the latter away. He was then to boil the rind, and while boiling, it would become yam. It did actually do so, and they sat down to eat some of it. Before beginning their meal the old woman requested Kweku not to look at her while she ate. Being very polite and obedient, he did exactly as he was told.
In the evening the old woman sent him into the garden to choose one of the drums which stood there. She warned him: "If you come to a drum which says 'Ding-ding' on being touched—take it. But be very careful not to take one which sounds 'Dong-dong.'" He obeyed her direction in every detail. When he showed her the drum, she looked pleased and told him, to his great delight, that he had only to beat it if at any time he were hungry. That would bring him food in plenty. He thanked the old woman heartily and went home.
As soon as he reached his own hut, he gathered his household together, and then beat the drum. Immediately, food of every description appeared before them, and they all ate as much as they wished.
The following day Kweku Tsin gathered all the people of the village together in the Assembly Place, and then beat the drum once more. In this way every family got sufficient food for their wants, and all thanked Kweku very much for thus providing for them.
Kweku's father, however, was not at all pleased to see his son thus able to feed the whole village. Anansi thought he, too, ought to have a drum. Then the people would be grateful to him instead of to Kweku Tsin. Accordingly, he asked the young man where the wonderful drum had come from. His son was most unwilling to tell him, but Anansi gave him no peace until he had heard the whole story. He then wasted no time, but set off at once toward the entrance hole. He had taken the precaution to carry with him an old nut which he pretended to crack. Then throwing it into the hole, he jumped in after it and hurried along to the silent village. Arrived at the first house, he shouted, "Is there no one in this town?" The old woman answered as before, and Anansi entered her house.
He did not trouble to be polite to her, but addressed her most rudely, saying, "Hurry up, old woman, and get me something to eat." The woman quietly directed him to go into the garden and choose the yam which should say, "Do not dig me out." Anansi laughed in her face and said, "You surely take me for a fool. If the yam does not want me to dig it out I will certainly not do so. I will take the one which wants to be gathered." This he did.
When he brought it to the old woman she told him, as she told his son, to throw away the inside and boil the rind. Again he refused to obey. "Who ever heard of such a silly thing as throwing away the yam? I will do nothing of the sort. I will throw away the peel and boil the inside." He did so, and the yam turned into stones. He was then obliged to do as she first suggested, and boil the rind. The latter while boiling turned into yam. Anansi turned angrily to the old woman and said, "You are a witch." She took no notice of his remark, but went on setting the table. She placed his dinner on a small table, lower than her own, saying. "You must not look at me while I eat." He rudely replied, "Indeed, I will look at you if I choose. And I will have my dinner at your table, not at that small one." Again she said nothing—but she left her dinner untouched. Anansi ate his own, then took hers and ate it also.
When he had finished she said, "Now go into the garden and choose a drum. Do not take one which sounds 'Dong-dong'; only take one which says 'Ding-ding.'" Anansi retorted, "Do you think I will take your advice, you witch? No, I will choose the drum which says 'Dong-dong.' You are just trying to play a trick on me."
He did as he wished. Having secured the drum he marched off without so much as a Thank you to the old woman.
No sooner had he reached home, than he longed to show off his new power to the villagers. He called all to the Assembly Place, telling them to bring dishes and trays, as he was going to provide them with food. The people in great delight hurried to the spot. Anansi, proudly taking his position in the midst of them, began to beat his drum. To his horror and dismay, instead of the multitude of food-stuffs which Kweku had summoned, Anansi saw, rushing toward him, beasts and serpents of all kinds. Such creatures had never been seen on the earth before.
The people fled in every direction—all except Anansi, who was too terrified to move. He speedily received fitting punishment for his disobedience. Fortunately, Kweku, with his mother and sisters, had been at the outer edge of the crowd, so easily escaped into shelter. The animals presently scattered in every direction, and ever since they have roamed wild in the great forests.

It happened one day that a poor Akim-man had to travel from his own little village to Accra—one of the big towns on the coast. This man could only speak the language of his own village—which was not understood by the men of the town. As he approached Accra he met a great herd of cows. He was surprised at the number of them, and wondered to whom they could belong. Seeing a man with them he asked him, "To whom do these cows belong?" The man did not know the language of the Akim-man, so he replied, "Minu"[I do not understand]. The traveller, however, thought that Minu was the name of the owner of the cows and exclaimed, "Mr. Minu must be very rich."
He then entered the town. Very soon he saw a fine large building, and wondered to whom it might belong. The man he asked could not understand his question, so he also answered, "Minu." "Dear me! What a rich fellow Mr. Minu must be!" cried the Akim-man.
Coming to a still finer building with beautiful gardens round it, he again asked the owner's name. Again came the answer, "Minu." "How wealthy Mr. Minu is!" said our wondering traveller.
Next he came to the beach. There he saw a magnificent steamer being loaded in the harbour. He was surprised at the great cargo which was being put on board and inquired of a bystander, "To whom does this fine vessel belong?"
"Minu," replied the man. "To the Honourable Minu also! He is the richest man I ever heard of!" cried the Akim-man.
Having finished his business, the Akim-man set out for home. As he passed down one of the streets of the town he met men carrying a coffin, and followed by a long procession, all dressed in black. He asked the name of the dead person, and received the usual reply, "Minu." "Poor Mr. Minu!" cried the Akim-man. 'so he has had to leave all his wealth and beautiful houses and die just as a poor person would do! Well, well—in future I will be content with my tiny house and little money." And the Akim-man went home quite pleased to his own hut.
Why the Moon and the Stars Receive Their Light From the Sun
ONCE upon a time there was great scarcity of food in the land. Father Anansi and his son, Kweku Tsin, being very hungry, set out one morning to hunt in the forest. In a short time Kweku Tsin was fortunate enough to kill a fine deer—which he carried to his father at their resting-place. Anansi was very glad to see such a supply of food, and requested his son to remain there on guard, while he went for a large basket in which to carry it home. An hour or so passed without his return, and Kweku Tsin became anxious. Fearing lest his father had lost his way, he called out loudly, "Father, father!" to guide him to the spot. To his joy he heard a voice reply, "Yes, my son," and immediately he shouted again, thinking it was Anansi. Instead of the latter, however, a terrible dragon appeared. This monster breathed fire from his great nostrils, and was altogether a dreadful sight to behold. Kweku Tsin was terrified at his approach and speedily hid himself in a cave near by.
The dragon arrived at the resting-place, and was much annoyed to find only the deer's body. He vented his anger in blows upon the latter and went away. Soon after, Father Anansi made his appearance. He was greatly interested in his son's tale, and wished to see the dragon for himself. He soon had his desire, for the monster, smelling human flesh, hastily returned to the spot and seized them both. They were carried off by him to his castle, where they found many other unfortunate creatures also awaiting their fate. All were left in charge of the dragon's servant—a fine, white cock—which always crowed to summon his master, if anything unusual happened in the latter's absence. The dragon then went off in search of more prey.
Kweku Tsin now summoned all his fellow-prisoners together, to arrange a way of escape. All feared to run away—because of the wonderful powers of the monster. His eyesight was so keen that he could detect a fly moving miles away. Not only that, but he could move over the ground so swiftly that none could outdistance him. Kweku Tsin, however, being exceedingly clever, soon thought of a plan.
Knowing that the white cock would not crow as long as he has grains of rice to pick up, Kweku scattered on the ground the contents of forty bags of grain which were stored in the great hall. While the cock was thus busily engaged, Kweku Tsin ordered the spinners to spin fine hempen ropes, to make a strong rope ladder. One end of this he intended to throw up to heaven, trusting that the gods would catch it and hold it fast, while he and his fellow-prisoners mounted.
While the ladder was being made, the men killed and ate all the cattle they needed—reserving all the bones for Kweku Tsin at his express desire. When all was ready the young man gathered the bones into a great sack. He also procured the dragon's fiddle and placed it by his side.
Everything was now ready. Kweku Tsin threw one end of the ladder up to the sky. It was caught and held. The dragon's victims began to mount, one after the other, Kweku remaining at the bottom.
By this time, however, the monster's powerful eyesight showed him that something unusual was happening at his abode. He hastened his return. On seeing his approach, Kweku Tsin also mounted the ladder—with the bag of bones on his back, and the fiddle under his arm. The dragon began to climb after him. Each time the monster came too near the young man threw him a bone, with which, being very hungry, he was obliged to descend to the ground to eat.
Kweku Tsin repeated this performance till all the bones were gone, by which time the people were safely up in the heavens. Then he mounted himself, as rapidly as possible, stopping every now and then to play a tune on the wonderful fiddle. Each time he did this, the dragon had to return to earth, to dance—as he could not resist the magic music. When Kweku was quite close to the top, the dragon had very nearly reached him again. The brave youth bent down and cut the ladder away below his own feet. The dragon was dashed to the ground but Kweku was pulled up into safety by the gods.
The latter were so pleased with his wisdom and bravery in giving freedom to his fellowmen, that they made him the sun the source of all light and heat to the world. His father, Anansi, became the moon, and his friends the stars. Thereafter, it was Kweku Tsin's privilege to supply all these with light, each being dull and powerless without him.

There once lived upon the earth a poor man called Ohia, whose wife was named Awirehu. This unfortunate couple had suffered one trouble after another. No matter what they took in hand misfortune seemed to lie in wait for them. Nothing they did met with success. They became so poor that at last they could scarcely obtain a cloth with which to cover themselves.
Finally, Ohia thought of a plan which many of his neighbours had tried and found successful. He went to a wealthy farmer who lived near, and offered to hew down several of his palm-trees. He would then collect their sap to make palm wine. When this should be ready for the market, his wife would carry it there and sell it. The proceeds would then be divided equally between the farmer, Ohia, and Awirehu.
This proposal having been laid before the farmer, he proved quite willing to agree to it. Not only so, but he granted Ohia a supply of earthen pots in which to collect the sap, as the miserable man was far too poor to buy any.
In great delight Ohia and his wife set to work. They cut down the trees and prepared them—setting the pots underneath to catch the sap. Before cock-crow on market-day, Ohia set off, with a lighted torch, to collect the wine and prepare it for his wife to take into the town. She was almost ready to follow.
To his great distress, on arriving at the first tree, instead of finding his earthen pot filled with the sweet sap, he saw it lying in pieces on the ground—the wine all gone. He went on to the second and third trees—but there, and at all the others, too, the same thing had happened.
His wife, in high spirits and ready for market, joined him at this moment. She saw at once by his face that some misfortune had again befallen them. Sorrowfully, they examined the mischief, and agreed that some wicked person had stolen the wine and then broken the pots to hide the theft. Awirehu returned home in despair, but Ohia set to work once more. He fetched a second supply of pots and placed them all ready to catch the sap.
On his return next morning, he found that the same behaviour had been repeated. All his wine was again stolen and his pots in fragments. He had no resource but to go to the farmer and tell him of these fresh misfortunes. The farmer proved to be very kind and generous and gave orders that Ohia might have as many pots as he should require.
Once more the poor fellow returned to the palm-trees, and set his pots ready. This third attempt, however, met with no better result than the two previous. Ohia went home in despair. His wife was of the opinion that they should give up trying to overcome their evil fortunes. It was quite evident that they could never attain success. The husband, however, determined that, at least, he would find and punish the culprit, if that were possible.
Accordingly, he bravely set his pots in order for the last time. When night came, he remained on guard among the trees. Midnight passed and nothing happened, but toward two o'clock in the morning a dark form glided past him to the nearest palm-tree. A moment after he heard the sound of a breaking pot. He stole up to the form. On approaching it he found that the thief was a bush-deer, carrying on its head a large jar, into which it was pouring the wine from Ohia's pots. As it emptied them it threw them carelessly on the ground, breaking them in pieces.
Ohia ventured a little nearer, intending to seize the culprit. The latter, however, was, too quick for him and escaped, dropping his great pot on the ground as he ran. The deer was very fleet, but Ohia had fully determined to catch him—so followed. The chase continued over many miles until mid-day arrived, at which time they had reached the bottom of a high hill. The deer immediately began to climb, and Ohia—though almost tired out—still followed. Finally, the summit of the hill was reached, and there Ohia found himself in the midst of a great gathering of quadrupeds. The deer, panting, threw himself on the ground before King Tiger. (Footnote: Tiger in West African stories is a leopard.) His Majesty commanded that Ohia should be brought before him to be punished for this intrusion into such a serious meeting.
Ohia begged for a hearing before they condemned him. He wished to explain fully his presence there. King Tiger, after consulting with some of the other animals, agreed to listen to his tale. Thereupon Ohia began the story of his unfortunate life. He told how one trial after another had failed, and how, finally, he had thought of the palm wine. He described his feelings on discovering the first theft after all his labour. He related his second, third, and fourth attempts, with the result of each. He then went on to tell of his chase after the thief, and thus explained his presence at their conference.
The quadrupeds listened very attentively to the recital of Ohia's troubles. At the conclusion they unanimously agreed that the deer was the culprit and the man blameless. The former was accordingly sentenced to punishment, while the latter received an apology in the name of the entire conference. King Tiger, it appeared, had each morning given Deer a large sum of money wherewith to purchase palm wine for the whole assembly. The deer had stolen the wine and kept the money.
To make up to Ohia for his losses, King Tiger offered him, as a gift, the power of understanding the conversation of all animals. This, said he, would speedily make Ohia a rich man. But he attached one condition to the gift. Ohia must never—on pain of instant death—tell any one about his wonderful power.
The poor man, much delighted, set off for home. When it was reached, he lost no time in setting to work at his palm-trees again. From that day his troubles seemed over. His wine was never interfered with and he and Awirehu became more and more prosperous and happy.
One morning, while he was bathing in a pool quite close to his house, he heard a hen and her chickens talking together in his garden. He listened, and distinctly heard a chicken tell Mother Hen about three jars of gold buried in Ohia's garden. The hen bade the chicken be careful, lest her master should see her scraping near the gold, and so discover it.
Ohia pretended to take no notice of what they were saying, and went away. Presently, when Mother Hen and her brood had gone, he came back and commenced digging in that part of the garden. To his great joy, he soon found three large jars of gold. They contained enough money to keep him in comfort all his life. He was careful, however, not to mention his treasure to any one but his wife. He hid it safely inside his house.
Soon he and Awirehu had become one of the richest couples in the neighbourhood, and owned quite a large amount of property. Ohia thought he could afford now to keep a second wife, so he married again. Unfortunately, the new wife did not at all resemble Awirehu. The latter had always been a good, kind, honest woman. The new wife was of a very jealous and selfish disposition. In addition to this she was lame, and continually imagined that people were making fun of her defect. She took the idea into her head that Ohia and Awirehu—when together—were in the habit of laughing at her. Nothing was further from their thoughts, but she refused to believe so. Whenever she saw them together she would stand and listen outside the door to hear what they were saying. Of course, she never succeeded in hearing anything about herself.
At last, one evening, Ohia and Awirehu had gone to bed. The latter was fast asleep when Ohia heard a conversation which amused him very much. A couple of mice in one corner of the room were arranging to go to the larder to get some food, as soon as their master—who was watching them—was asleep. Ohia, thinking this was a good joke, laughed outright. His lame wife heard him, and rushed into the room. She thereupon accused him of making fun of her again to Awirehu. The astonished husband, of course, denied this, but to no purpose. The jealous woman insisted that, if he were laughing at an innocent joke, he would at once tell it to her. This Ohia could not do, without breaking his promise to King Tiger. His refusal fully confirmed the lame woman's suspicions and she did not rest till she had laid the whole matter before the chief. He, being an intimate friend of Ohia, tried to persuade him to reveal the joke and set the matter at rest. Ohia naturally was most unwilling to do anything of the sort. The persistent woman gave the chief no peace till he summoned her husband to answer her charge before the assembly.
Finding no way of escape from the difficulty; Ohia prepared for death. He first called all his friends and relatives to a great feast, and bade them farewell. Then he put his affairs in order—bequeathed all his gold to the faithful Awirehu, and his property to his son and servants. When he had finished, he went to the Assembly Place where the people of the neighbourhood were gathered together.
He first took leave of the chief, and then commenced his tale. He related the story of his many misfortunes—of his adventure with the deer, and of his promise to King Tiger. Finally, he explained the cause of his laughter which had annoyed his wife. In so speaking he fell dead, as the Tiger had warned him.
He was buried amid great mourning, for every one had liked and respected him. The jealous woman who had caused her husband's death was seized and burnt as a witch. Her ashes were then scattered to the four winds of heaven, and it is owing to this unfortunate fact that jealousy and selfishness are so widespread through the world, where before they scarcely existed.

A few hundred years ago, the chief Mauri [God] determined to have a splendid yam festival. He therefore sent his messengers to invite all his chiefs and people to the gathering, which was to take place on Fida [Friday].
On the morning of that day he sent some of his servants to the neighbouring towns and villages to buy goats, sheep, and cows for the great feast. Mr. Klo [the tortoise], who was a tall and handsome fellow was sent to buy palm wine. He was directed to the palm-fields of Koklovi [the chicken].
At that time Klo was a very powerful traveller and speedily reached his destination although it was many miles distant from Mauri's palace.
When he arrived Koklovi was taking his breakfast. When they had exchanged polite salutations Koklovi asked the reason of Klo's visit. He replied, "I was sent by His Majesty Mauri, the ruler of the world, to buy him palm wine." "Whether he's ruler of the world or not," answered Koklovi, "no one can buy my wine with money. If you want it you must fight for it. If you win you can have it all and the palm-trees too."
This answer delighted Klo as he was a very strong fighter. Koklovi was the same, so that the fighting continued for several hours before Klo was able to overcome Koklovi. He was at last successful, however, and securely bound Koklovi before he left him.
Then, taking his great pot, he filled it with wine. Finding that there was more wine than the pot would hold, Klo foolishly drank all the rest. He then piled the palm-trees on his back and set out for the palace with the pot of wine. The amount which he had drunk, however, made him feel so sleepy and tired that he could not walk fast with his load. Added to this, a terrible rain began to fall, which made the ground very slippery and still more difficult to travel over.
By the time, Klo succeeded in reaching his master's palace the gates were shut and locked. Mauri, finding it so late, had concluded that every one was inside.
There were many people packed into the great hall, and all were singing and dancing. The noise of the concert was so great that no one heard Klo's knocking at the gate, and there he had to stay with his great load of wine and palm-trees.
The rain continued for nearly two months and was so terrible that the people all remained in the palace till it had finished. By that time Klo had died, under the weight of his load—which he had been unable to get off his back. There he lay, before the gate, with the pile of palm-trees on top of him.
When the rain ceased and the gates were opened the people were amazed to see this great mound in front of the gate, where before there had been nothing. They fetched spades and began to shovel it away.
When they came to the bottom of the pile there lay Klo. His earthenware pot and the dust had caked together and formed quite a hard cover on his back.
He was taken into the palace—and by the use of many wonderful medicines he was restored to life. But since that date he has never been able to stand upright. He has been a creeping creature, with a great shell on his back.

A village hunter had one day gone farther afield than usual. Coming to a part of the forest with which he was unacquainted, he was astonished to hear a voice singing. He listened; this was the song:
"It is man who forces himself on things,
Not things which force themselves on him."
The singing was accompanied by sweet music—which entirely charmed the hunter's heart.
When the little song was finished, the hunter peeped through the branches to see who the singer could be. Imagine his amazement when he found it was none other than a tortoise, with a tiny harp slung in front of her. Never had he seen such a marvellous thing.
Time after time he returned to the same place in order to listen to this wonderful creature. At last he persuaded her to let him carry her back to his hut, that he might enjoy her singing daily in comfort. This she permitted, only on the understanding that she sang to him alone.
The hunter did not rest long content with this arrangement, however. Soon he began to wish that he could show off this wonderful tortoise to all the world, and thereby thought he would gain great honour. He told the secret, first to one, then to another, until finally it reached the ears of the chief himself. The hunter was commanded to come and tell his tale before the Assembly. When, however, he described the tortoise who sang and played on, the harp, the people shouted in scorn. They refused to believe him.
At last he said, "If I do not speak truth, I give you leave to kill me. To-morrow I will bring the tortoise to this place and you may all hear her. If she cannot do as I say, I am willing to die." "Good," replied the people, "and if the tortoise can do as you say, we give you leave to punish us in any way you choose."
The matter being then settled, the hunter returned home, well pleased with the prospect. As soon as the morrow dawned, he carried tortoise and harp down to the Assembly Place—where a table had been placed ready for her. Every one gathered round to listen. But no song came. The people were very patient, and quite willing to give both tortoise and hunter a chance. Hours went by, and, to the hunter's dismay and shame, the tortoise remained mute. He tried every means in his power to coax her to sing, but in vain. The people at first whispered, then spoke outright, in scorn of the boaster and his claims.
Night came on and brought with it the hunter's doom. As the last ray of the setting sun faded, he was beheaded. The instant this had happened the tortoise spoke. The people looked at one another in troubled wonder: "Our brother spoke truth, then, and we have killed him." The tortoise, however, went on to explain. "He brought his punishment on himself. I led a happy life in the forest, singing my little song. He was not content to come and listen to me, He had to tell my secret (which did not at all concern him) to all the world. Had he not tried to make a show of me this would never have happened."
"It is man who forces himself on things,
Not things which force themselves on him."

Kwofi was the eldest son of a farmer who had two wives. Kwofi's mother had no other children.
When the boy was three years old his mother died. Kwofi was given to his stepmother to mind. After this she had many children. Kwofi, of course, was the eldest of all.
When he was about ten years old his father also died. Kwofi had now no relative but his stepmother, for whom he had to work.
As he grew older, she saw how much more clever and handsome he was than her own children, and grew very jealous of him. He was such a good hunter that day after day he came home laden with meat or with fish.
Every day she treated him in the same way. She cooked the meat, then portioned it out. She gave to each a large helping, but when it came to Kwofi's turn she would say, "Oh, my son Kwofi, there is none left for you! You must go to the field and get some ripe paw-paw." Kwofi never complained. Never once did he taste any of the meat he had hunted. At every meal the others were served, but there was never enough for him.
One evening, when the usual thing had happened, Kwofi was preparing to go to the field to fetch some paw-paw for his supper. All at once one of the gods appeared in the village, carrying a great bag over his shoulder. He summoned all the villagers together with these words: "Oh, my villagers, I come with a bag of death for you!"
Thereupon he began to distribute the contents of his bag among them. When he came to Kwofi he said: "Oh, my son Kwofi, there was never sufficient meat for you, neither is there any death."
As he said these words every one in the village died except Kwofi. He was left to reign there in peace, which he did very happily.

A certain old lady had a very fine flock of sheep. She had fed and cared for them so well that they became famous for their fatness. In time a wicked wolf heard of them and determined to eat them.
Night after night he stole up to the old dame's cottage and killed a sheep. The poor woman tried her best to save her animals from harm—but failed.
At last there was only one sheep left of all the flock. Their owner was very sad. She feared that it, too, would be taken away from her, in spite of all she could do. While she was grieving over the thought of this a lion came to her village.
Seeing her sad face, he asked the reason of it. She soon told him all about it. He thereupon offered to do his best to punish the wicked wolf. He himself went to the place where the sheep was generally kept—while the latter was removed to another place.
In the meantime the wolf was on his way to the cottage. As he came he met a fox. The fox was somewhat afraid of him and prepared to run away. The wolf, however, told him where he was going, and invited him to go too. The fox agreed and the two set off together. They arrived at the cottage and went straight to the place where the sheep generally slept. The wolf at once rushed upon the animal, while Fox waited a little behind. Just as Fox was deciding to enter and help Wolf there came a bright flash of lightning. By the light of it the fox could see that the wolf was attacking—not a sheep—but a lion. He hastily ran away, shouting as he went: "Look at his face! Look at his face!"
During the flash Wolf did look at the pretended sheep. To his dismay he found he had made a great mistake. At once he began to make humble apologies—but all in vain. Lion refused to listen to any of his explanations, and speedily put him to death.
Maku Mawu and Maku Fia;
or
"I Will Die God's Death" and "I Will Die the King's Death"
Once upon a time there were two men who were such great friends that they were almost always together. If one was seen the other was sure to be near. They had given one another special names, which were to be used only by themselves. One name, Maku Mawu, meant, "I will die God's death," and the other, Maku Fia, "I will die the King's death."
By and by, however, the other villagers heard these names and gradually every one got into the habit of calling the two friends by the nicknames in preference to the real ones. Finally, the King of the country heard of them and wished to see the men who had chosen such strange titles. He sent for them to Court, and they came together. He was much pleased with the one who had chosen the name of "Maku Fia," but he was annoyed at the other man's choice and sought a chance of punishing him.
When he had talked to them a little while, he invited both to a great feast which he was to give in three days' time. As they went away he gave a fine large yam to Maku Mawu and only a small round stone to his own favourite. The latter felt somewhat aggrieved at getting only a stone, while his friend got such a fine yam. Very soon he said, "Oh, dear! I do not think it is any use carrying this stone home. How I wish it were a yam! Then I could cook it for dinner." Maku Mawu being very generous— immediately replied, "Then change with me, for I am quite tired of carrying my great yam." They exchanged, and each went off to his own home. Maku Fia cut up his yam and cooked it. Maku Mawu broke his stone in half and found inside some beautiful ornaments which the King had hidden there. He thought that he would play a trick on the King, so told nobody what had been in the stone.
On the third day they dressed to go to the King's feast. Maku Mawu put on all the beautiful ornaments out of the stone. Maku Fia dressed himself just as usual.
When they reached the palace the King was amazed to see the wrong man wearing his ornaments, and determined to punish him more effectually next time. He asked Maku Fia what he had done with the stone, and the man told him he had exchanged it for his friend's yam.
At first the King could not think of any way to punish Maku Mawu, as, of course, the latter had not done anything wrong. He soon had an idea, however. He pretended to be very pleased with the poor man and presented him with a beautiful ring from his own finger. He then made him promise to come back in seven days and show the ring to the King again, to let the latter see that it was not lost. If by any chance he could not produce the ring—he would lose his head. This the King did, meaning to get hold of the ring in some way and, so get the young man killed.
Maku Mawu saw what the King's design was, so determined to hide the ring. He made a small hole in the wall of his room, put the ring in it, and carefully plastered over the place again. No one could see that the wall had been touched.
After two days the King sent for the wife of Maku Mawu and asked her to find the ring. He promised her a large sum of money for it not telling her, of course, what would happen to her husband if the ring were lost. The woman went home and searched diligently but found nothing. Next day she tried again with no better success. Then she asked her husband what he had done with it. He innocently told her it was in the wall. Next day, when he was absent, she searched so carefully that at last she found it.
Delighted, she ran off to the King's palace and gave the ring to him. She got the promised money and returned home, never dreaming that she had really sold her husband's life.
On the sixth day the King sent a message to Maku Mawu, telling him to prepare for the next day. The poor man bethought himself of the ring and went to look if it were still safe. To his despair the hole was empty. He asked his wife and his neighbours. All denied having seen it. He made up his mind that he must die.
In the meantime the King had laid the ring in one of the dishes in his palace and promptly forgot about it. When the seventh morning had arrived he sent messengers far and wide, to summon the people to come and see a man punished for disobeying the King's orders. Then he commanded his servants to set the palace in order, and to take the dishes out of his room and wash them.
The careless servants—never looking-to see if the dishes were empty or not took them all to a pool near by. Among them was the dish containing the ring. Of course, when the dish was being washed, out fell the ring into the water—without being noticed by the servants.
The palace being all in readiness, the King went to fetch the ring. It was nowhere to be found and he was obliged to go to the Assembly without it.
When every one was ready the poor man, Maku Mawu, was called to come forward and show the ring. He walked boldly up to the King and knelt down before him, saying. "The ring is lost and I am prepared to die. Only grant me a few hours to put my house in order." At first the king was unwilling to grant even that small favour, but finally he said, "Very well, you may have four hours. Then you must return here and be beheaded before the people." The innocent man returned to his home and put everything in order. Then, feeling hungry, he thought, "I may as well have some food before I die. I will go and catch a fish in the pool."
He accordingly took his fish-net and bait, and started off to the very pool where the King's dishes had been washed. Very soon he caught a fine large fish. Cutting it open, to clean it, his delight may be imagined at finding the lost ring inside it.
At once he ran off to the palace crying: "I have found the ring! I have found the ring!" When the people heard him, they all shouted in joy: "He named himself rightly 'Maku Mawu,' for see—the death God has chosen for him, that only will he die." So the King had no excuse to harm him, and he went free.

In a big town lived a very rich gentleman. The fame of his wealth soon spread. A clever thief heard of it and determined to have some for himself.
He managed to hide himself in a dark corner of the gentleman's room—while the latter was counting his bags of money. As soon as the old gentleman left the room to fetch something, the thief caught up two of the bags and escaped.
The owner was astonished, on his return a few minutes later, to find two bags short. He could find no trace of the thief.
Next morning, however, he chanced to meet the robber just outside the house. The dishonest man looked so confused that the rich man at once suspected he was the thief. He could not, however, prove it, so took the case before the judge.
The thief was much alarmed when he heard this. He sought a man in the village and asked his advice. The wise man undertook to help him—if he would promise to pay him half the money when he got off. This the robber at once said he would do.
The old man then advised him to go home and dress in rags. He must ruffle his hair and beard and behave as if he were mad. If any one asked a question he must answer "Moo."
The thief did so. To every question asked by the judge he said, "Moo, moo." The judge at last grew angry and dismissed the court. The thief went home in great glee.
Next day, the wise man came to him for his half of the stolen money. But he could get no answer but "Moo" from the thief, and at last, in despair, he had to go home without a penny. The ungrateful robber kept everything for himself. The wise man regretted very much that he had saved the thief from his just punishment but it was now too late.

A Ram once decided to make a clearing in the woods and build himself a house. A leopard who lived near also made up his mind to do the very same thing.
Unknown to each other they both chose the same site. Ram came one day and worked at the clearing. Leopard arrived after Ram had gone and was much surprised to find some of his work already done. However, he continued what Ram had begun. Each was daily surprised at the progress made in his absence, but concluded that the fairies had been helping him. He gave them thanks and continued with his task.
Thus the matter went on—the two working alternately at the building and never seeing one another. At last the house was finished to the satisfaction of both.
The two prepared to take up their abode in the new home. To their great astonishment they met. Each told his tale, and after some friendly discussion, they decided to live together.
Both Leopard and Ram had sons. These two young animals played together while their parents hunted. The leopard was very much surprised to find that every evening his friend Ram brought home just as much meat or venison from the hunt as he himself did. He did not dare, however, to ask the other how he obtained it.
One day, before setting out to hunt, Leopard requested his son to find out, if possible, from young Ram, how his father managed to kill the animals. Accordingly while they were at play, little Leopard inquired how Father Ram, having neither claws nor sharp teeth, succeeded in catching and killing the beasts. Ram refused to tell unless young Leopard would promise to show his father's way also. The latter agreed. Accordingly they took two large pieces of plantain stem and set out into the woods.
Young Leopard then took one piece and placed it in position. Then, going first to the right, then to the left—bowing and standing on his hind legs and peeping at the stem just as his father did—he took aim, sprang toward the stem and tore it.
Young Ram then took the other piece and placed it in position. Wasting no time he went backward a little way, took aim, then ran swiftly forward-pushing his head against the stem and tearing it to pieces. When they had finished they swept the place clean and went home.
In the evening the leopard obtained all the information about the hunt from his son. The latter warned him that he must always be careful when he saw the ram go backward. He kept this in mind, and from that day watched the ram very closely.
Some time afterward it rained, making the floor of the house very slippery. The leopard called the ram, as usual, to dine with him. As he was coming, the ram slipped backward on the wet floor. The leopard, seeing this, thought the other was about to kill him. Calling to his son to follow, he sprang with all his might over the wall of the house and fled to the woods. The ram called him back, but he did not listen. From that time leopards have made their abode in the woods while rams have remained at home.

At one time leopards did not know how to catch animals for food. Knowing that the cat was very skilful in this way, Leopard one day went to Cat and asked very politely if she would teach him the art. Cat readily consented.
The first thing Leopard had to learn was to hide himself among the bushes by the roadside, so that he would not be seen by any animal passing by. Next, he must learn how to move noiselessly through the woods. He must never allow the animal he chased to know that he was following it. The third great principle was how to use his left paws and side in springing upon his prey.
Having taught him these three things, Cat requested him to go and practise them well. When he had learnt them thoroughly he could return to her and she would give him more lessons in hunting.
Leopard obeyed. At first he was very successful and obtained all the food he wanted. One day, however, he was unable to catch anything at all.
Being very hungry, he bethought himself what he could have for dinner. Suddenly he remembered that the cat had quite a large family. He went straight to her home and found her absent.
Never thinking of her kindness to him—Leopard only remembered that he was hungry—he ate all her kittens. Puss, on discovering this dreadful fact, was so angry that she refused to have anything more to do with the great creature.
Consequently the leopard has never been able to learn how to catch animals that pass him on the right side.
Quarcoo Bah-Boni

Once upon a time in a certain village lived a man and his wife who were childless. One day, however, when the husband was away hunting, the woman had a baby son. She was greatly troubled at her husband's absence, because she was unable to let him know of the child's arrival. In that country it is the custom for the father to give the baby its name when it is a week old. As the time approached for the naming, the woman wondered to herself what name she could give the child if her husband did not return in time. To her amazement, the child himself answered, "My name is Quarcoo Bah-boni." As he was only a week old she was astonished to hear him talk. The next day she got a greater surprise. She had been grumbling because her husband was not there to go to the farm for her and fetch food. The baby announced, "I will go to the farm"—which he did.
When he was a few weeks old, she was one day very busy. She laid him down on the bed while she went on with her task. In a few minutes several boys came up to her in great anger. "Your son has been beating us and ill-treating us in the street," said they. "My son!" she cried. "Why, my son is only a tiny baby. He is lying asleep on my bed." To convince them she went indoors to show them the baby. Imagine her surprise when he was nowhere to be seen! She had to apologize to the boys and beg them to forgive the child. Shortly after, he came in and put himself to bed.
He continued these mischievous tricks till his mother could no longer endure them. So she turned him out of the house and forbade him to return. He departed in great glee.
After walking a few miles, he came to a building where a goat, wolf, tiger, lion, and elephant lived very happily together. These animals were all sitting round their fire when he approached. After many polite speeches, he begged their permission to stay and be their servant, as he was motherless. The animals, after a little discussion, agreed to this, thinking that he would be able to help them in many ways. He was given a seat and some food, which he ate with great relish.
These five animals usually took it in turns to go out to their farm—a few miles away every morning, to bring home food for the day. It being Goat's turn, he asked Quarcoo to come with him to carry back the load.
The basket was accordingly handed to the little boy and he set off meekly after the goat. When they reached the farm, Quarcoo set down the basket and ran off to play. He paid no heed at all to the goat's calls for assistance, but went on quietly playing. At last the goat was so annoyed that he came up to Quarcoo and boxed his ears. To his great astonishment, the boy gave him such a blow that he fell to the ground. Quarcoo then proceeded to beat him till he cried for mercy. Nor would he stop his blows till the goat had promised to finish the work, carry home the load, and tell no one what had happened. Having promised this, the goat was allowed to go free. By this time the poor animal's face was bruised and swollen.
When the time came to go home the goat had to pack up the load and put it on his head. Then they set out.
As soon as they came in sight of their cottage, Quarcoo took the basket from the goat and he himself carried it into the cottage.
The other animals all exclaimed in wonder when they saw the goat's face, and asked him how it had happened. "I was unfortunate enough to get into a swarm of bees when I was working. They stung me," answered the poor goat.
Next day it was the wolf's turn to go to the farm. He also returned, much bruised and swollen. Goat (guessing what had happened) listened with a smile to the excuses made by Wolf to the others.
Goat and Wolf afterward talked the matter over and wondered much at the strength of the little boy.
Each day another animal took his turn at the farm, and each day he returned in the same condition as his friends had done. At last all the animals had been, and all now came together to discuss how best they might get rid of Quarcoo Bah-boni.
They made up their minds that, early the following morning, they would start off together and leave the boy in possession of the house. They prepared a big basket of food and set it ready.
Unfortunately for them, Quarcoo had heard their discussion and decided that he also would go with them. He quietly got himself a large leaf, rolled it round him (for he was very tiny) and laid himself down in the basket of food.
At dawn the animals got up very quietly. Goat, being the youngest, was given the basket to carry. They started, feeling very thankful to get away from the tiresome boy—never dreaming that they were carrying him along with them.
When they had gone a fair distance Goat, feeling very hot and tired, sat down to rest for a little while. As soon as the others had gone out of sight, he opened the basket, meaning to have some food unknown to his friends. His greed was rewarded, however, by a terrible blow on the face. He then heard the words, 'shut the basket at once, and say nothing to the others." He obeyed and hurried after the others in fear of this terrible boy.
As soon as he reached them he called out, "Wolf, Wolf, it is your turn now to take the basket. I am very tired." Wolf took the load at once.
They had not gone far when Wolf began to think of all the nice things in the basket and he also said he was going to rest a little while in the shade. Having got rid of the others in this way, he hastily opened the basket. He was greeted by Quarcoo in the same way as Goat had been, and speedily closed the basket and followed the others. In this way each animal got his turn of carrying the basket, and each was punished for his greed.
Finally, Elephant's turn came. When he rejoined the others and asked some one to relieve him of his load they cried out, "If you do not want to carry it any farther, throw it away." He did so, and they all took to their heels. They ran for several miles and only stopped when they came to a huge tree, in whose shade they sat down to rest, being quite breathless.
Quarcoo, however, had got there before them. He had quietly stepped out of the basket, taken a short cut across country and arrived at the tree some time before them. He guessed that they would probably rest there—so he climbed up into the branches. There he remained, hidden among the leaves, while the animals sat on the ground below.
There they discussed Quarcoo and all the trouble he had caused them. They blamed Goat for having been the one to persuade them to take the boy as a servant. Goat being the youngest of the company had the domestic work to do and he had welcomed the idea of help. Goat indignantly denied being the cause of all their troubles, saying: "If I am really to blame for the admission of Quarcoo—let him appear before us." Quarcoo promptly jumped down from the tree and stood in front of them. They were so alarmed at his appearance they scattered in all directions. The wolf ran to the woods—the tiger into the heart of the forest, the elephant to Nigeria, the lion to the desert, and the goat to the abode of human beings. That is the reason why they live now in these various places instead of all together as they did previously.

In the olden days all the animals of the world lived together in friendship. They had no one to rule over them and judge them. In consequence, many very wicked deeds were constantly being done, as no one needed to fear any punishment.
At last they all met together to discuss this bad state of affairs, and, as a result, they decided to choose a king. The great difficulty was how to choose him.
Lion was the first animal suggested. But all opposed him because, they said, he was too fierce. Wolf was next named—but the sheep and goats refused to have him because he was their foe. They knew they would have bad treatment if he were chosen.
As it was impossible to please every one by choice, they decided in another way. Two miles away was a great stool, placed under a very ancient tree which they believed to be the abode of some of their gods. They would have a great race. The animal which reached and sat down first on the stool should be chosen king.
The day of the race arrived. All animals, great and small, prepared to take part in it. The signal being given, they started off. The hare—being a very fine runner—speedily outdistanced the others. He reached the stool quite five hundred yards ahead of the next animal. You may judge of his annoyance when, just as he was going to sit down, a voice came from the stool saying, "Take care, Mr. Hare, take care. I was here first." This was the chameleon. He, being able to change his colour to suit his surroundings, had seized Mr. Hare's tail just as the race began. Having made his colour match the hare's, no one had noticed him. He had held on very tightly, and when the hare turned round to take his seat Chameleon dropped off and landed on the stool.
The hare saw how he had been tricked and was very angry. The other animals, however, arrived before he could harm the chameleon. According to the agreement they had made, they had no choice but to make Chameleon king.
But none of the animals were satisfied with the choice. So as soon as the meeting was over, all scattered in every direction and left Chameleon quite alone.
He was so ashamed that he went and made his home at the top of a very high tree on a mountain. In the dead of night you may hear him calling his attendants to come and stay with him. But he is left quite alone. "A king without subjects is no king."
To Lose an Elephant For the Sake of a Wren Is a Very Foolish Thing To Do

In the olden times there stood in the King's town a very great tree. This tree was so huge that it began to overshadow the neighbouring fields. The King decided to have it cut down. He caused his servants to proclaim throughout the country that any one who succeeded in cutting down the tree with a wooden axe should have an elephant in payment.
People thought it would be impossible to cut down such a great tree with an axe of wood. Spider, however, decided to try by cunning to gain the elephant. He accordingly presented himself before the King and expressed his readiness to get rid of the tree.
A servant was sent with him to keep watch and to see that he only used the wooden axe given him. Spider, however, had taken care to have another, made of steel, hidden in his bag.
He now began to fell the tree. In a very few minutes, he said to the servant, 'see, yonder is a fine antelope. If you are quick, you will be able to hit it with a stone. Run!" The lad did as he was bid, and ran a long way—but could see no sign of the antelope. In his absence, Spider seized the sharp axe and hastened to cut as much of the tree as he could, carefully hiding the axe in his bag before the servant's return.
This trick he repeated several times, till finally the tree was cut down. Spider went to the King to get the elephant, and took the servant to prove that he had used only the wooden axe. He got his promised reward, and started for home in great glee. On the way, however, he began to think over the matter. Shall I take this animal home?" thought he. "That would be foolish, for then I would be obliged to share it with my family. No! I will hide it in the forest, and eat it at my leisure. In that way I can have the whole of it for myself. Now what can I take home for the children's dinner?"
Thereupon he looked around and a little distance away saw a tiny wren sitting on a tree. "Exactly what I want," he said to himself. "That will be quite sufficient for them. I will tie my elephant to this tree while I catch the bird."
This he did, but when he tried to seize the latter, it flew off. He chased it for some time, without success. "Well! Well!" said he. "My family will just have to go without dinner. I will now go back and get my elephant." He returned to the spot where he had left the animal, but to his dismay the latter had escaped. Spider was obliged to go home empty-handed, and he, as well as his family, went dinnerless that day.

A hunter, who was terribly poor, was one day walking through the forest in search of food. Coming to a deep hole, he found there a leopard, a serpent, a rat, and a man. These had all fallen into the trap and were unable to get out again. Seeing the hunter, they begged him to help them out of the hole.
At first he did not wish to release any but the man. The leopard, he said, had often stolen his cattle and eaten them. The serpent very frequently bit men and caused their death. The rat did no good to any one. He saw no use in setting them free.
However, these animals pleaded so hard for life that at last he helped them out of the pit. Each, in turn, promised to reward him for his kindness—except the man. He, saying, he was very poor, was taken home by the kind-hearted hunter and allowed to stay with him.
A short time after, Serpent came to the hunter and gave him a very powerful antidote for snake-poison. "Keep it carefully," said Serpent. "You will find it very useful one day. When you are using it, be sure to ask for the blood of a traitor to mix with it." The hunter, having thanked Serpent very much, took great care of the powder and always carried it about with him.
The leopard also showed his gratitude by killing animals for the hunter and supplying him with food for many weeks.
Then, one day, the rat came to him and gave him a large bundle. "These," said he, "are some native cloths, gold dust, and ivory. They will make you rich." The hunter thanked the rat very heartily and took the bundle into his cottage.
After this the hunter was able to live in great comfort. He built himself a fine new house and supplied it with everything needful. The man whom he had taken out of the pit still lived with him.
This man, however, was of a very envious disposition. He was not at all pleased at his host's good fortune, and only waited an opportunity to do him some harm. He very soon had a chance.
A proclamation was sounded throughout the country to say that some robbers had broken into the King's palace and stolen his jewels and many other valuables. The ungrateful man instantly hurried to the King and asked what the reward would be if he pointed out the thief. The King promised to give him half of the things which had been stolen. The wicked fellow thereupon falsely accused his host of the theft, although he knew quite well that he was innocent.
The honest hunter was immediately thrown into prison. He was then brought into Court and requested to show how he had become so rich. He told them, faithfully, the source of his income, but no one believed him. He was condemned to die the following day at noon.
Next morning, while preparations were being made for his execution, word was brought to the prison that the King's eldest son had been bitten by a serpent and was dying. Any one who could cure him was begged to come and do so.
The hunter immediately thought of the powder which his serpent friend had given him, and asked to be allowed to use it. At first they were unwilling to let him try, but finally he received permission. The King asked him if there were anything he needed for it and he replied, "A traitor's blood to mix it with." His Majesty immediately pointed out the wicked fellow who had accused the hunter and said: There stands the worst traitor for he gave up the kind host who had saved his life." The man was at once beheaded and the powder was mixed as the serpent had commanded. As soon as it was applied to the prince's wound the young man was cured. In great delight, the King loaded the hunter with honours and sent him happily home.

A man, hunting one day in the forest, met a tiger. At first each was afraid of the other; but after some talking they became quite friendly. They agreed to live together for a little time. First the man would live with the tiger in his forest home for two weeks. Then the tiger would come and live in the man's home.
The tiger behaved so well to the man during his visit that the man felt he had never been so well treated in all his life. Then came the time for the tiger to return home with the man. As they were going the tiger was somewhat afraid. He asked the man if he really thought he would be safe. "What if your friends do not like my face and kill me?" he asked. "You need fear nothing," said his host; "no one will touch you while I am there." The tiger therefore came to the man's house and stayed with him three weeks. He had brought his male cub with him, and the young tiger became very friendly with the man's son.
Some months later the man's father died. When Tiger heard of his friend's great loss, he and his cub set out at once to see and condole with him. They brought a large sum of money to help the man.
As Tiger was going home again two of the man's friends lay in hiding for him and shot him. Fortunately he was not killed, but he was very much grieved lest these men had shot him at his friend's wish. He determined to find out if the man had known anything at all about the shot.
Accordingly he went to the place in the forest where he had first met his friend. There he lay down as if he were dead, after telling his cub to watch and see what would happen.
By and by the man came along. When he saw the tiger lying, as he thought, dead, he was terribly troubled. He began to cry and mourn for his friend, and sat there all night long with Tiger's cub, to watch that no harm should befall the body.
When morning came and Tiger was quite assured that his friend had had nothing at all to do with the shot, he was very glad. He got up, then, to the man's great astonishment, and explained why he had pretended to be dead.
"Go home," said Tiger, "and remember me always. In future for your sake I will never touch a man unless he first meddles with me."

The Omanhene is the chief of a village. A certain Omanhene had three sons, who were very anxious to see the world. They went to their father and asked permission to travel. This permission he readily gave.
It was the turn of the eldest to go first. He was provided with a servant and with all he could possibly require for the journey.
After travelling for some time he came to a town where lived an Omanhene who loved riddles. Being a stranger the traveller was, according to custom, brought by the people before the chief.
The latter explained to him that they had certain laws in their village. One law was that every stranger must best the Omanhene in answering riddles or he would be beheaded. He must be prepared to begin the contest the following morning.
Next day he came to the Assembly Place, and found the Omanhene there with all his attendants. The Omanhene asked many riddles. As the young man was unable to answer any of them, he was judged to have failed and was beheaded.
After some time the second son of the Omanhene started on his travels. By a strange chance he arrived at the same town where his brother had died. He also was asked many riddles, and failed to answer them. Accordingly he too was put to death.
By and by the third brother announced his intention of travelling. His mother did all in her power to persuade him to stay at home. It was quite in vain.
She was sure that if he also reached the town where his brothers had died, the same thing would happen to him. Rather than allow this, she thought she would prefer him to die on the way.
She prepared for him a food called cankey—which she filled with poison. Having packed it away in his bag, he set off. Very soon he began to feel hungry. Knowing, however, that his mother had not wished him to leave home, and therefore might have put some poison in the food, he thought he would test it before eating it himself. Seeing a vulture near by, he threw it half the cake.
The bird ate the cankey, and immediately fell dead by the roadside. Three panthers came along and began to eat the vulture. They also fell dead.
The young man cut off some of the flesh of the panthers and roasted it. He then packed it carefully away in his bundle.
A little farther on he was attacked by seven highway robbers. They wanted to kill him at once. He told them that he had some good roast meat in his bundle and invited them to eat with him first. They agreed and divided up the food into eight parts.
While they were eating the young man carefully hid his portion. Soon all the seven robbers fell ill and died. The young man then went on his way.
At last he reached the town where his brothers had died. Like them, he was summoned to the Assembly Place to answer the riddles of the Omanhene. For two days the contest proved equal. At the end of that time, the young man said, "I have only one riddle left. If you are able to answer that, you may put me to death." He then gave this riddle to the Omanhene:
Half kills one—
One kills three—
Three kills seven.
The ruler failed to answer it that evening, so it was postponed till the next day.
During the night the Omanhene disguised himself and went to the house where the stranger was staying. There he found the young man asleep in the hall.
Imagining that the man before him was the stranger's servant, and never dreaming-that it was the stranger himself, he roused the sleeper and promised him a large reward if he would give him the solution to the riddle.
The young man replied that he would tell the answer if the Omanhene would bring him the costume which he always wore at the Assembly.
The ruler was only too pleased to go and fetch it for him. When the young man had the garments quite safely, he explained the riddle fully to the crafty, Omanhene. He said that as they were leaving home, the mother of his master made him cankey. In order to find out if the cankey were good, they gave half to a vulture. The latter died. Three panthers which tasted the vulture also died. A little of the panther's roasted flesh killed seven robbers.
The Omanhene was delighted to have found out the answer. He warned the supposed servant not to tell his master what had happened.
In the morning all the villagers assembled together again. The Omanhene proudly gave the answer to the riddle as if he himself had found it out. But the young man asked him to produce his ceremonial dress, which he ought to be wearing in Assembly. This, of course, he was unable to do, as the young man had hidden it carefully away.
The stranger then told what had happened in the night, and how the ruler had got the answer to the riddle by cheating.
The Assembly declared that the Omanhene had failed to find out the riddle and must die. Accordingly he was beheaded—and the young man was appointed Omanhene in his place.

Long, long ago there dwelt in a town two brothers whose bad habits brought them much trouble. Day by day they got more deeply in debt. Their creditors gave them no peace, so at last they ran away into the woods. They became highway robbers.
But they were not happy. Their minds were troubled by their evil deeds. At last they decided to go home, make a big farm, and pay off their debts gradually.
They accordingly set to work and soon had quite a fine farm prepared for corn. As the soil was good, they hoped the harvest would bring them in much money.
Unfortunately, that very day a bushfowl came along. Being hungry, it scratched up all the newly planted seeds and ate them.
The two poor brothers, on arriving at the field next day, were dismayed to find all their work quite wasted. They put down a trap for the thief. That evening the bushfowl was caught in it. The two brothers, when they came and found the bird, told it that now all their debts would be transferred to it because it had robbed them of the means of paying the debts themselves.
The poor bird—in great trouble at having such a burden thrust upon it made a nest under a silk-cotton tree. There it began to lay eggs, meaning to hatch them and sell the young birds for money to pay off the debts.
A terrible hurricane came, however, and a branch of the tree came downs. All the eggs were smashed. As a result, the bushfowl transferred the debts to the tree, as it had broken the eggs.
The silk-cotton tree was in dismay at having such a big sum of money to pay off. It immediately set to work to make as much silk cotton as it possibly could, that it might sell it.
An elephant, not knowing all that had happened, came along. Seeing the silk cotton, he came to the tree and plucked down all its bearings. By this means the debts were transferred to the poor elephant.
The elephant was very sad when he found what he had done. He wandered away into the desert, thinking of a way to make money. He could think of none.
As he stood quietly under a tree, a poor hunter crept up. This man thought he was very lucky to find such a fine elephant standing so still. He at once shot him.
Just before the animal died, he told the hunter that now the debts would have to be paid by him. The hunter was much grieved when he heard this, as he had no money at all.
He walked home wondering what he could do to make enough money to pay the debts. In the darkness he did not see the stump of a tree which the overseers had cut down in the road. He fell and broke his leg. By this means the debts were transferred to the tree-stump.
Not knowing this, a party of white ants came along next morning and began to eat into the tree. When they had broken it nearly to the ground, the tree told them that now the debts were theirs, as they had killed it.
The ants, being very wise, held a council together to find out how best they could make money. They decided each to contribute as much as possible. With the proceeds one of their young men would go to the nearest market and buy pure linen thread. This they would weave and sell and the profits would go to help pay the debts.
This was done. From time to time all the linen in stock was brought and spread out in the sunshine to keep it in good condition. When men see this linen lying out on the ant-hills, they call it "mushroom," and gather it for food.

Farmer Mybrow was one day looking about for a suitable piece of land to convert into a field. He wished to grow corn and yams. He discovered a fine spot, close to a great forest—which latter was the home of some fairies. He set to work at once to prepare the field.
Having sharpened his great knife, he began to cut down the bushes. No sooner had he touched one than he heard a voice say, "Who is there, cutting down the bushes?" Mybrow was too much astonished to answer. The question was repeated. This time the farmer realized that it must be one of the fairies, and so replied, "I am Mybrow, come to prepare a field." Fortunately for him the fairies were in great good humour. He heard one say, "Let us all help Farmer Mybrow to cut down the bushes." The rest agreed. To Mybrow's great delight, the bushes were all rapidly cut down with very little trouble on his part. He returned home, exceedingly well pleased with his day's work, having resolved to keep the field a secret even from his wife.
Early in January, when it was time to burn the dry bush, he set off to his field, one afternoon, with the means of making a fire. Hoping to have the fairies' assistance once more, he intentionally struck the trunk of a tree as he passed. Immediately came the question, "Who is there, striking the stumps?" He promptly replied, "I am Mybrow, come to burn down the bush." Accordingly, the dried bushes were all burned down, and the field left clear in less time that it takes to tell it.
Next day the same thing happened. Mybrow came to chop up the stumps for firewood and clear the field for digging. In a very short time his faggots and firewood were piled ready, while the field was bare.
So it went on. The field was divided into two parts—one for maize and one for yams. In all the preparations—digging, sowing, planting—the fairies gave great assistance. Still, the farmer had managed to keep the whereabouts of his field a secret from his wife and neighbours.
The soil having been so carefully prepared, the crops promised exceedingly well. Mybrow visited them from time to time, and congratulated himself on the splendid harvest he would have.
One day, while maize and yams were still in their green and milky state, Mybrow's wife came to him. She wished to know where his field lay, that she might go and fetch some of the firewood from it. At first he refused to tell her. Being very persistent, however, she finally succeeded in obtaining the information—but on one condition. She must not answer any question that should be asked her. This she readily promised, and set off for the field.
When she arrived there she was utterly amazed at the wealth of the corn and yam. She had never seen such magnificent crops. The maize looked most tempting—being still in the milky state—so she plucked an ear. While doing so she heard a voice say, "Who is there, breaking the corn?" "Who dares ask me such a question?" she replied angrily—quite forgetting her husband's command. Going to the field of yams she plucked one of them also. "Who is there, picking the yams?" came the question again. "It is I, Mybrow's wife. This is my husband's field and I have a right to pick." Out came the fairies. "Let us all help Mybrow's wife to pluck her corn and yams," said they. Before the frightened woman could say a word, the fairies had all set to work with a will, and the corn and yams lay useless on the ground. Being all green and unripe, the harvest was now utterly spoiled. The farmer's wife wept bitterly, but to no purpose. She returned slowly home, not knowing what to say to her husband about such a terrible catastrophe. She decided to keep silence about the matter.
Accordingly, next day the poor man set off gleefully to his field to see how his fine crops were going on. His anger and dismay may be imagined when he saw his field a complete ruin. All his work and foresight had been absolutely ruined through his wife's forgetfulness of her promise.

Once upon a time, a big Lion, the king of the forest, decided that all old animals must be put to death, so that there would be only young and strong animals in the forest, and that no useless animals occupied the space and ate the food reserved for the young ones. Naturally, all old and infirm animals were killed mercilessly. But one clever old Hare, called Kalulu, escaped the punishment and hid himself in a cave out of sight of the others. Only the son of Kalulu knew of the whereabouts of Kalulu. When all was done, the forest became normal for a time, and the animals forgot all about the Lion's cruel decision and deeds. One day, however, while the Lion was asleep, he kept his mouth wide open, as he had a bad cold. A long Snake passing by, thinking it to be a hole, entered the Lion's mouth and made itself very comfortable in the Lion's throat.  The Lion could not roar. To add to his discomfiture, whenever the Snake changed position inside his threat, the Lion experienced terrible pain.
Therefore, he announced in sign language that, if anyone charmed the Snake out of his mouth, the Lion would reward him richly.  Many young animals came forward, but none could lure the wretched Snake out of its warm and comfortable hole. As a result, the Lion grew more and more angry and restless.  At last the young son of Kalulu hatched a plot. He ventured near the Lion and whispered into his ear that he had recently seen a wise person in a cave, who could come and cure his malady.  'Bring him to me at once!' sighed the Lion. At this command, the young Hare lost no time in running to his father in the cave. He narrated to him all the events taking place in the forest, and requested him to come and help the young animals solve the Lion's problem. Sure enough, Kalulu the Here was delighted to be of help. He decided to disguise himself as a great magician, rather, a witch-doctor. He tied a skin cap on his head, conch shells around his body and a garland of tiger teeth around his neck.
In this way he looked very impressive, indeed, as a witch-doctor. Kalulu and his son then caught a small Mouse in a trap, and set off to see the Lion.  The Lion had by then grown thin and tired, because he had been unable to eat anything for several days. His senses had grown weak, and he could not see clearly. He, however, bade the magician to set to work immediately. To play his part fully, Kalulu made a great show of dancing rhythmically and uttering spells and invoking the spirits of the dead. Meanwhile, he quietly left the mousetrap in front of the Lion's open mouth. After a short time, as he was singing the magic chants, the Snake inside the Lion's throat became more and more aware of the smell of a Mouse near by and slipped out of the Lion's mouth to investigate. At once the Lion felt a great relief from pain. Roaring with joy, he hugged Kalulu to his chest.  'Dear friend,' he called with great emotion. 'name your price now, and I will grant it this very minute!'  The Hare, modest as all hares go, said. 'Your Majesty.
I need nothing for myself, I only request a boon for the sake of others. Please grant that all old animals are allowed to live, because at a time of need like this, when the young animals find themselves helpless to solve the problem, an old and experienced animal would still be of some help.' The Lion realized his previous mistake and immediately agreed to this request. Thereafter, all animals were allowed to live for ever and ever.

Kalulu the Hare, being a strict vegetarian, liked to grow his own vegetables. He planted rows and rows of cabbages, carrots, lettuce, turnips and other juicy vegetables and tended them regularly. He was so agile and hard-working that he had a regular supply of different kinds of fresh vegetables all the year round. Indeed, because of this, other animals envied him. Once, while he was preparing his garden to plant some pumpkins, a big Elephant, towering over the garden fence, happened to pass by. He became curious to know what Kalulu was doing. Being a pure vegetarian himself, his mouth began to water at the sight of the ripe juicy maize cobs that were swinging gracefully in the wind. Controlling his greed, he just looked over the fence and greeted Kalulu. 'Good afternoon, brother Kalulu,' he said, smiling, 'busy, as usual, I presume?'  Kalulu returned the friendly greeting, as he continued with the work. 'This is pumpkin season, you know.' he said cheerfully, 'so I am planting pumpkins before it gets too late.'
'I see,' said the Elephant, 'I am very fond of pumpkins myself. Could you possibly help to plant some in my garden too?' he asked very innocently. Kalulu was very hard-working, but he was also clever not to waste his time and energy on lazy people. He did not want to fall into the Elephant's clever trap. 'I am rather too busy, as you see, brother Elephant,' he excused himself politely, 'but I can lend you my hoe and some seeds. You can plant them in your garden. Pumpkins grow like wild nettle, you see, so you don't have to attend to them much.' Then he gave the hoe and some seeds to the Elephant. As you all know, the Elephant is a bulky animal. Whenever he does a little work, he becomes too tired and hot. This particular Elephant had, in addition, trouble with his blood pressure, and suffered from acute palpitation when he exerted himself. Naturally, he dug a few careless holes in his garden, poured the seeds pell-mell in them, covered them with untilled soil, threw the hoe in a corner and went to bed, panting violently for breath.
As days went by, Kalulu's garden grew rich with yellow flowers from the pumpkin plants. Here and there tiny pumpkins made their appearance among the lush green foliage, while most of the seeds in the Elephant's garden died of overcrowding. Those few that managed to grow, looked measly and week. No one could tell whether they would survive to bear fruit at all. The Elephant grew more and more greedy and jealous, but Kalulu looked carefree and happy. Soon there were several big fat pumpkins in Kalulu's garden. As it was time to harvest them and store them, Kalulu planned to do the job the following day. He got up early next morning and went to his garden. But lo and behold! Not a single pumpkin was left on any plant. He was shocked beyond words. Kalulu knew that it could be none other than the greedy old Elephant who had stolen his precious pumpkins. Being far too clever, Kalulu did not make any fuss. On the other hand, he decided to teach the old thief a severe lesson. There were other young pumpkins still coming up. When they grew up, he would do something.
He did not have to wait long, for the young ones grew into another lot of big fat pumpkins, ready to be picked. As soon as it became dark, one evening, Kalulu chose a large pumpkin, cut a hole on the lower side, scooped out all the flesh, then hid himself inside the pumpkin shell, and waited for the thief to come. He had a music drum with him, which he wanted to play aloud in the night and frighten the Elephant out of his wits. But in the quiet dark night, the cosy hole in the pumpkin made him drowsy and he soon fell asleep. Presently there was a-thumping and a—plucking arising from the neighbourhood. Before Kalulu could wake up, his pumpkin was raised high up in the air and pushed deep into a warm tunnel. Kalulu woke up with a start to find himself, drum, pumpkin and all, swallowed whole by the large thieving Elephant. At first he did not know what to do. Suddenly an idea flashed into his mind. With great difficulty he crept out of the pumpkin and started beating the drum loudly and jumping violently about inside the Elephant, thus causing the poor beast immense terror and terrible pain.
The Elephant abruptly stopped eating and ran home groaning with pain and horror. After giving him a long dose of discomfort and worry, Kalulu at last stopped. The big Elephant was so exhausted that he fell asleep immediately. Kalulu quietly climbed up the Elephant's throat and slid down his tusk and ran home, happy to breathe the fresh air again. From that day the Elephant developed a great dislike for pumpkins, because he thought that they did not agree with his stomach and caused him nightmares. This affected his blood pressure more than ever. Therefore, he stopped stealing any more of Kalulu's pumpkins. Kalulu was thus rid of the old thief.

It is often said, 'Hard work and humility earn respect and power; respect and power can make one proud and vain; pride and vanity cause the downfall of all.' This statement proved true in the case of Kalulu at one time. Kalulu, as you know, was a hard—working and clever Hare. Every one respected his wisdom. This went to his head and he started boasting of his agility and good judgement. He even went to the extent of criticizing some of the other animals, and particularly teased the old Tortoise, who was already three times as old as Kalulu himself. He named the Tortoise a slogger, a plodder and a crawler, while he bragged of his own speed of movement.  This annoyed the old Tortoise immensely. Therefore, he thought and thought for a long time to find a way to put the Hare in his proper place. One day he called Kalulu and said, 'Kalulu, young man, you have been calling me names because of my slowness. However, I would like to compare my speed with yours. Would you, therefore, run a race with me?' Kalulu laughed aloud. 'Run a race, indeed!' he exclaimed.
'Without doing any such thing, we know who will win!' he jeered. 'All the same,' insisted the Tortoise, 'just for the fun of it, let us run a race up to a distance of six milestones.' Kalulu agreed, with great amusement at  the old one's obstinacy. They fixed the date for the race, and also the six-stone track for the race. In the meantime, the Tortoise called a meeting of all his close relatives, uncles, sons, brothers and sisters. He chose five out of them who resembled him most, and instructed each of them to hide near one of the milestones on the race track, starting from the second stone onwards. The great day of the race dawned. All the five Tortoises took their positions as agreed previously, unknown to any onlookers. Kalulu and the old Tortoise started on the race at the first milestone. As expected. Kalula ran with great speed and reached the second milestone in a few minutes. But what a surprise awaited him! 'So far. I am leading.' shouted the old Tortoise, emerging from near the milestone. Kalulu could not believe his eyes. Concealing his surprise, he said.
'There are four more stones to go.' Then he flashed past, faster than before. The same surprise awaited him at the third milestone as well. 'You cannot beat me!' smiled a cool Tortoise from near the stone. I came before you and have had a short rest. Let us proceed.' Kalulu grew hot under the ears. He felt he was growing crazy and was imagining things. Nevertheless, he continued to run till the fourth stone. Once again the sight of the Tortoise near the fourth stone shook him very much. He began to grow a little annoyed, too, then suddenly he continued to the fifth milestone. He was exasperated beyond words, when the Tortoise at the fifth stone said teasingly, 'You may yet win the race, Kalulu. for there is one more stone to go.' Kalulu gritted his teeth. His indignation spurred him on to run faster than ever before. Hopping mad with anger, he sped towards the sixth and last milestone. At the sixth stone what did he see but the old Tortoise standing with a broad grin stretched across his wrinkled face. 'I thought you would never arrive. I started growing a little weary, waiting for you.
I polished up my shell a bit and picked out all the thorns from my tired feet . . . .' Kalulu did not want to hear any more. He felt utterly humiliated, for he believed it was one and the same Tortoise who ran with him and defeated him in the race. Kalulu hid his face in shame, ran home and curled up in his bed. He wished and wished that he had never boasted and had never teased anyone and never brought shame on himself. He never teased anyone again, because he learned that even humble looking people have some hidden talents in them which, because of their modesty, they do not wish to flaunt in public.

One summer it was unbearable in the forest. The water-holes had all dried up, making it hot and uncomfortable. As a result the animals thirsted for water. When conditions became worse, the Lion, the king of the forest, ordered that one of the water—holes be scooped and dug deeper. He also insisted that every animal in the forest must take part in the digging, because every one of them needed the water. All the animals obeyed the royal command. They started digging day and night on a shift arrangement. As the king of the forest, the Lion also graciously took part in the work, but there was one cunning Hyena who avoided the hard work. When some of them were on the day shift, the Hyena pretended that he was to be on the night shift. When the night shift started, he always said that he had already done his share of the work on the day shift. This trick held good for a few days. However, the animals soon understood the ruse of the cunning Hyena and reported the matter to their king. The Lion declared that the Hyena should not be allowed to drink from the water-hole, when it was completed.
Within a few days' time, the water—hole was dug deep enough, and to everybody's delight, a spring gushed forth. They soon made it into a well so that the water would not be wasted. The Lion asked some animals to take turns and guard the well, day and night, so that the lazy Hyena could not have any water to drink.  However. the crafty Hyena cheated each of them and managed to drink his fill of water and escaped punishment. This annoyed and vexed everyone. This is where our hero, Kalulu the Hare, comes into the picture. Kalulu had put in his full share of hard Work and had, therefore, a right to express his views. He got into one of his boastful moods. 'Our guards are rather dreamy,' he remarked. 'If I had been put to watch over the well, the Hyena would have been under lock and key long before this. To catch a cunning animal, one has to use vigilance and common sense. And common sense is what most of our animals lack!' The Lion listened to him for a while and decided that Kalulu himself should guard the well that night, as he seemed to have definite plans to catch the sly Hyena.
At night Kalulu hid himself a distance away from the well. If he stayed too close, the Hyena would know that he was there. Around midnight the Hyena made his usual appearance. He was rather surprised to find that there was no one on duty. This made him suspicious that there might be a trap. However, he wanted to be quite sure that he was alone. He took out a small gourd from his bag. 'Who wants any water?' he said aloud to himself. 'As long as l have this gourd of potion, I can go without drinking-water for days and days together, thanks to the really efficient witch-doctor!' Kalulu was watching all this from his hiding place. He was really intrigued by the Hyena's monologue. He very much wanted to know more about that strange liquid which kept the Hyena from feeling thirsty. 'Hello! brother Hyena,' he called from behind the tree where he was hiding, 'why don't you come over, so that we can have a friendly chat?' The Hyena pretended to be surprised, although he knew that there was someone, somewhere, watching over the well. 'Hello! Kalulu? What a surprise!' he exclaimed, 'to see you wasting your beauty sleep and keeping vigil here, when it is really not necessary.'
He went up to the Hare and sat down beside him. 'Life is becoming difficult, you know,' he started the conversation, 'with the ban on drinking-water, ban on this and ban on that. Now it seems the king would put a ban on your sleep as well. So, I approached a witch-doctor and he gave me a liquid in this little gourd. I don't have to drink water any more.' He pulled out the gourd once again and showed it to Kalulu. The Hare got more and more interested. 'Is it really effective?' he asked the Hyena with curiosity. 'Effective? Baah . . . .!' chuckled the Hyena, 'you should actually feel how it works. Ever since my last drink of water, I have never felt thirsty. It is because this witch-doctor put just one drop of this potion in my throat to keep it wet. It is so effective that the very sight of water makes me feel full.' 'In that case, why did you come to the well, at this hour of the night?' Kalulu asked cautiously. 'That is merely to inform the other animals who may be on duty,' said the Hyena, 'that they need not keep watch any more, as l have my own private arrangement for quenching my thirst. Poor nitwits, they need to sleep, after all this digging and what not.' 'I see!' said Kalulu, deep in thought.
'Would you like to try some of this potion?' the Hyena offered. 'Then you will realize the foolishness of spending so much time and energy digging a well, keeping a watch day and night, and wasting much needed sleep. Next time, if we have a drought, the witch-doctor is the very person who would put us right.' Kalulu was quite taken in by the tall claims of the Hyena. Slowly all his plans to catch the Hyena were shattered. 'I don't mind trying your potion,' Kalulu agreed, 'but I must keep watch as per instructions!' The Hyena told Kalulu that only one drop of the potion should be put deep inside the throat, so that the throat would stay wet for many days. There was no use putting it just on the tongue. To achieve this, one had to bend his head far backwards and open the mouth very wide. Faithfully, Kalulu did all this to receive the potion in his throat. During his efforts, he tipped backwards and toppled over. In a split second, the Hyena drew out a rope from his bag, tied up Kalulu from head to foot and left him lying there. 'My brother, Kalulu,' he laughed, 'no potion in the whole world would quench my thirst as the water in this well does!'
He kept on laughing as he drank his fill, and ran away from the spot before it was daybreak. Next morning, when the other animals discovered Kalulu in his unenviable state, they could only laugh and laugh, because he had been well punished for his boastfulness. In the end, it was left to a Tortoise to catch the crafty Hyena. He never paid any heed to the prattle ef the Hyena, but pretended to be a stone. When the Hyena approached the well, he just put out his head and caught hold of the Hyena's foot in between his teeth and kept him there, until the others came to his aid. With great rejoicings the Hyena was imprisoned.

Chief Mukulu had a problem. The people in his chiefdom were not happy. They were afraid to get out of their huts to go and work in the fields, or go to the river to fetch water. They were afraid to let their children play out of their sight. All the while they remained huddled in groups and were startled and worried at the slightest rustling of the leaves.  All this, because of a big Snake! This Snake had killed and eaten several of the villagers, but Chief Mukulu could do nothing to kill it. He had sent his best hunters to kill the Snake. And every time he sent out someone, all that remained of him later was just a big bulge in the Snake's belly. Naturally, the ordinary people were terrified to move out of their houses.  The Snake took residence on a large tree. The Chief wanted to cut it down so that the Snake would move away, but none could undertake the big task, as the Snake pounced on any one who approached the tree. Chief Mukulu then thought of leaving the village and setting up his chiefdom in a different area. It was a difficult decision, because he was not sure of finding another suitable spot.
His chiefdom was then situated in a beautiful valley surrounded by all kinds of fruit-bearing trees. The soil was good for cultivation. A clear river was flowing near by, from which his people could draw water all through the year. Who would be so foolish as to leave such a spot for fear of a stupid Snake? In exasperation Chief Mukulu abandoned the idea of moving away. Instead, he announced that he would give away his daughter, Threshya, in marriage to anyone who would kill the Snake. This was a great inducement. Many men came forward to kill the Snake, only to meet their doom. All this time our hero, Kalulu the Hare, had been hearing stories and rumours of the Snake's atrocities. He also wished to try his luck. Therefore, on a fine morning, he went to Chief Mukulu's chiefdom with his two pets, a Dog and a Goat, and stopped at the market place. 'I am Kalulu the 'Wonder-maker',' he announced loudly. 'Come, if you please, and watch the wonder I make.' In a village anything new attracted the attention of the people. They were eager to see something sensational, end so most people, young and old, forgetting their fear of the Snake, gathered round Kalulu.
The Snake, whose attention was also drawn by the loud announcement, put out his head on the fork of a tree to watch the goings on below. 'Please fetch a few pieces of meat and a basket of fresh grass!' Kalulu asked the people politely. In no time the solicitous people brought meat and grass as required by Kalulu. He then chained his Dog to one tree and tied the Goat to another. 'Ladies and gentlemen!' he addressed the people, after clearing his throat, 'here you see two different types of animals. I brought them up since they were babies. I have taught the Dog to eat grass and the Goat to eat meat. You are now going to watch both of them eat.' At this elaborate announcement, the people laughed aloud. 'There is nothing to laugh at!' Kalulu warned. He then placed the meat in front of the Goat and the grass in front of the Dog. 'My dear pets.' he spoke to them tenderly, 'at the word 'Go', start eating what is in front of you!' There was a hushed silence, and the people waited expectantly. 'Go!' Kalulu gave the word. What do you think happened? Nothing! The Goat turned his head away, and the Dog remained equally indifferent. 'My children,' Kalulu coaxed them, 'are you shy to eat in front of strangers?
They are friends and they won't harm you.' Again nothing happened. Kalulu got slightly annoyed. 'Who do you think you are.' he doemanded a little sternly. 'to keep these honoured people waiting? Eat the stuff quickly, and let them go home!' Still the same result followed. 'Look here,' he scolded the animals, 'are you going to keep these people waiting in the sun for ever?' The Goat and the Dog continued to remain unmoved by all these demonstrations. In the meantime, the people showed signs of impatience and mockery, but Kalulu insisted that they stayed and watched the wonder. 'Sooner or later they are bound to eat, when they are hungry, because they are used to eating each other's food,' he said. Soon it became evening. No amount of good words or coaxing would move the animals even a whit to taste the food in front of them. Kalulu grew more and more angry. He shouted abuses at them. He kicked the Dog and hit the Goat and then he called for an axe. 'There is no use keeping these disobedient pets,' he shouted, 'let me teach them a lesson. How dare they defy me in front of strangers and put me to shame?' With these words Kalulu took hold of the axe, handed to him by someone. The people stood aghast.
The Snake, who had been watching the proceedings from his tree, had had enough of this farce. He could not bear to see the innocent animals being nagged by the stubborn Hare. Deciding to put an end to their suffering, he slithered down the tree to exchange the food in front of them. Just as he came down. Kalulu raised the axe. With one blow he cut the Snake's head off his body. That was the end of the Snake. An unexpected cry of admiration from the people reached the sky. The people, who had come to watch one type of wonder, saw another wonder — that of Kalulu killing the Snake. 'Hurrah for Kalulu the 'Wonder-maker'!' they chanted. 'Carry him to the Chief.' The Chief listened to their narration with great attention and offered Threshya as wife to Kalulu. 'How can I marry a girl?' laughed Kalulu. 'It will look as ridiculous as a Dog eating grass! Give her in marriage to a man!' Everyone understood the point, and joined in the laughter. Kalulu looked around. There he spotted a handsome hefty young hunter. 'Give her to this young man,' Kalulu suggested.  The Chief was happy to do so. Threshya was overjoyed to get a human husband. The hunter in his turn, was deeply grateful to Kalulu as he had never expected to be the husband of a chief's daughter.
He promised that he would never, ever hunt and kill any Hare. Kalulu left the place with his pets, while Chief Mukulu's problem was satisfactorily solved.

The Lion, the king of the forest, had once again become aggressive, terrorizing the poor animals in the forest. He had killed most of the grass-eating animals for his food. As their number steadily decreased, other carnivorous animals began worrying about their own livelihood. They tried to advise the king to exercise restraint in his eating habits. This angered the Lion all the more. He felt that, being the king of the forest, he had every right to do what he pleased, and scorned anyone who dared to criticize his actions. Besides the animals, the Lion also attacked human beings. He raided lonely villages and killed many innocent peeple. Once, while he was on such a raid, he was wounded in his paw by the spear of a hunter. For a few days thereafter, he was confined to his cave. This gave time for the other animals to come together and discuss ways and means to teach the Lion a polite lesson. Many different plans, some fantastic and some impracticable, were suggested, and so the animals did not come to any satisfactory solution to their problem. In the meantime, the Lion got better and started on his rampage again. One day he had just killed and feasted on a Zebra.
Having found a shady nook, he was taking a cosy nap there, when Kalulu the Hare spotted him from a distance. He remembered his own bright idea that he had put forth at the meeting. He decided to put it into practice, and ran home to get a strong gunny bag. Tucking the bag under his arm, he reached the place where the Lion was asleep. He was disturbed as Kalulu made a noise stepping on dried crunchy leaves and busied himself collecting firewood and twigs. 'What is going on there?' the Lion asked in annoyance. 'I am collecting firewood for you, Sir,' Kalulu replied politely. 'I do not need any,' retorted the Lion, 'what gave you that crazy idea?' 'Soon you will feel hungry, Sir,' said Kalulu, 'and you may need the fire, Sir.' The Lion laughed aloud. 'If I feel hungry, I will need food and not fire!' he said, still laughing, because he was much amused by Kalulu's simplicity. 'Precisely, Sir,' said Kalulu humbly. 'Have you ever thought of cooking your food before eating it. Sir?' 'Why, no!' said the Lion in surprise.  'Now you can try, Sir. On the fire I will be lighting for you, you can cook your food, Sir.' 'I don't see any food.' 'You are seeing. Sir.' 'What do you mean?' asked the Lion, a little puzzled.
'You are seeing me, Sir,' Kalulu said very charmingly, 'I'll be your food for your next meal, Sir.' 'Oh, ho!' laughed the Lion. 'How is it that you do not want to run away from me?' He was really being amused by the simple Hare. 'There is no need, Sir,' replied Kalulu, 'because you have already seen me, and would want to kill me for your food. Even if I run away, you would still catch up with me and kill me, Sir. Therefore, you may as well do that, Sir, without going through all the running, gasping and panting. We both are sensible beings, Sir, so let us spare all the unnecessary details, Sir.' 'Where does the fire fit into the plan?' the Lion wanted to know. 'Pardon me, Sir, for teaching you,' Kalulu excused himself, 'but human beings say that rabbit meat tastes good when cooked, Sir. I have decided to offer my best to my king, Sir. Hence, when | get the fire ready for you, it will be just a question of your killing me, cooking me and eating me . . . as simple as that, Sir.' 'You are strange, indeed!' the Lion marvelled at Kalulu's open talk. He was also pleased to have met someone who would talk freely to him. All his subjects only said, 'Yes, Sir,' or 'No, Sir,' whenever he spoke to them.
Here was someone with whom he could chat for a while, really. 'What is that under your arm?' he asked, changing the subject. 'This, Sir?' Kalulu asked, casually pointing to the gunny bag. 'This is just a magic sack a witch-doctor gave me, Sir.' 'A magic sack?' the Lion got interested. 'Yes, Sir,' said Kalulu, 'he told me not to keep it down, Sir. If I did, the magic in the sack would fade away, Sir.' 'What magic is it?' the Lion's curiosity was tickled. 'Nothing much, Sir,' replied Kalulu, 'it makes heavy things light and light things heavy, Sir. I use this for carrying heavy loads of wood, Sir.' 'And you call it 'Nothing much, Sir'?' the Lion mimicked the Hare. 'I thought you would not be interested, Sir,' Kalulu said. 'Why not? I am as interested in magic as any one else,' declared the Lion firmly. 'Why don't you show it to me?' 'If you so wish, Sir,' Kalulu said hesitatingly as he got ready to demonstrate the magic of the gunny bag. Kalulu took out a rope from the sack, tied it to one end of the mouth of the sack and threw the other end of the rope over the branch of a tree, so that the sack dangled on one side and the loose end of the rope was on the other side of the branch.
After this, he appeared hesitant. 'What is the hitch?' the Lion demanded. 'I'm sorry, Sir,' said Kalulu, 'I need your help to hold the rope.' 'I'm willing,' the Lion said, and rose from his cosy corner and came to the tree. 'Sir,' instructed Kalulu. 'as soon as I get into the sack, please pull the rope and see if the sack goes up.' The Lion gave time for Kalulu to get into the sack, then pulled at the other end of the rope. To his great surprise, the sack would not rise even an inch. He tried hard, but it remained where it was. The Lion was convinced that the sack had made the Here a very heavy object. Actually, Kalulu was holding fast to a lower branch of the tree when the Lion was pulling at the rope, thus preventing the sack from rising up. Kalulu got down from the sack. 'Would you like to prove the other point, Sir,' he suggested politely, 'that a heavy object can become light inside this sack?' 'Why not?' asked the Lion, as he prepared to climb into the sack. With a great show of servility Kelulu helped him into the sack. 'Are you ready, Sir?' he asked greatly concerned. 'May I pull?' 'Yes, pull!' the Lion gave the royal command. In a single heave from Kalulu, the sack moved from its original position and went up and up.
The Lion laughed in wonder. 'It is indeed full of magic!' he agreed. 'how strange that a small animal like you can raise a heavy animal so high up.' 'Yes indeed, Sir,' observed Kalulu as he raised the sack very high up on the branch, while he tied the other end of the row securely to the root of the tree. 'Now let me down,' said the Lion as he felt that he was staying too long in the sack. 'I cannot, Sir,' Kalulu replied, as if greatly worried. 'Why not?' demanded the Lion, this time in panic. 'The sack seems to have made you lighter than air. Sir,' Kalulu appeared to be more and more worried, 'I cannot get you down without help, Sir. To prevent you from rising any further, I have secured the rope to the tree, Sir.' 'Then do something quickly!' the Lion urged. 'Yes, Sir, I shall run to the witch-doctor and get him in person to come and remove the magic, Sir. I am sorry, Sir. It is all my fault, Sir.' With these words he ran away, not to the witch-doctor, but to the other animals, to whom he explained what had happened. All the animals came there to watch the fun. The Wild Buffalo changed his voice and pretended to be the witch-doctor. 'Lion, the king of the forest.' he called, 'you have used my sack without my permission.
If you went to regain your original weight, you should promise me something. If you refuse, you will get lighter still, and fly away from your kingdom.' 'I promise anything!' the frightened Lion shouted in dismay. 'Just get me out of here!' 'To regain your normal weight, you must revert to normal eating habits.' 'Yes, I promise that,' said the Lion meekly. 'Just one meal a day, understand?' 'Yes, yes, just one meal a day and sparingly too!' the Lion was impatient. 'You are a good soul. Your weight is restored,' announced the witch-doctor. Kalulu signalled to the other animals to go away. When they were all gone, he brought the sack down and let the Lion out. 'Where is the witch-doctor?' he asked cautiously. 'He has vanished into air, Sir,' Kalulu explained. 'It is one of his magic powers, Sir, to disappear, when his work is over. . .' The Lion did not want to know any more of the magic. He was sick and tired of it. Without further ado, he moved away to keep his promise to the witch—doctor. Kalulu's trick thus brought order back to the forest.

Once Kalulu the Hare was greatly annoyed to hear that a neighbouring Chief and his daughter were causing great concern to the young men of the chiefdom. The Chief's daughter was a very pretty maiden and many young men felt it a great honour to be able to marry her. However, as the Chief and his daughter were very vain, they felt that none of the young men was worthy of the girl's hand in marriage, and decided to punish all those who dared to press their suit. Therefore they devised a very cruel test to eliminate them. To carry out this test, the Chief called all his subjects together into his courtyard, and seated them in a large circle. In the centre of this circle, a huge earthen pot of water was kept boiling. The eager young men were asked to line up, and to come one by one to take up a bowl of boiling water from the pot and to drink it bravely in one pull, in order to prove their deep love for the young lady. No need to say that it was an impossible thing to do. At the very first sip, all the young men scalded their lips and tongues so terribly, that they could only drop the bowl suddenly and run away in great pain and shame. The Chief and his daughter laughed aloud to see them thus humiliated, for the young men were rendered speechless and foodless for many days to come.
This was the story which came to Kalulu's ears and he decided to teach a severe lesson to the cruel Chief and his vain daughter. So he came to the Chief's village to attend the next session, when a new set of suitors were to be tested. Kalulu took his place in the line of young men. When his turn came, he went to the pot of boiling water, took out a bowl of water and placed it on the ground beside him. Then he started bowing down respectfully, left and right and all around, greeting all the assemblage. So far, the villagers were used to seeing silent young men, who came quietly to the boiling water, took a bowlful, tasted it and ran away in a great hurry. Today the event was completely different. The grinning Hare was bowing to everyone. The people's interest was aroused, as they settled themselves down to watch some curiosity. After elaborate salutes, Kalulu addressed the Chief politely.' 'Sir,' he said, 'suppose I succeed in drinking this boiling water, will you promise  me something?' 'Baah!' said the Chief disdainfully, 'you are not going to succeed.' Kalulu winked at the people and hilarious laughter broke out. We are, by now, aware that Kalulu possessed a great gift for showmanship. He delighted in holding his audience spellbound for a long stretch of time.
In this episode, Kalulu exploited his talent to the full, and succeeded in diverting the attention of the people from the bowl of boiling water that he had left on the ground. 'Suppose, for argument's sake,' Kalulu persisted, taking up the conversation. 'suppose I win, will you then . . . promise, Sir?' 'I give no promises!' shouted the Chief, somewhat annoyed. 'It is only fair, Sir,' Kalulu pointed out politely, 'in the interest of your daughter's future happiness . . . .' 'All right, all right. What is it?' the Chief barked with visible impatience. 'Please say, 'I promise', Sir.' 'I promise,' said the Chief without caring, because he was growing more and more cross with this impertinent nobody of a Hare, and wanted to put an end to this foolish delay in the proceedings. 'Now, that is your word of honour, Sir,' Kalulu was firm, 'say that you will never again organize any type of cruel tests in your village for any reason whatsoever!' A thunderous hand-clapping from the cheering crowd drowned the words of the Chief. The Chief was taken aback, for he could not walk back on his promise in front of his subjects. 'All right, all right, go ahead and drink,' he shouted at Kalulu and waved his hands impatiently. He was very much vexed with himself for being trapped by a mere nobody of a Hare.
All the while he hoped that the upstart would miserably fail in the boiling water test. This part settled, Kalulu took one look at the bowl of boiling water, which still looked quite hot. 'I am to die,' he wailed, pointing to the bowl dramatically, 'let me go home and take leave of my beloved parents, for I may never see them again!'  Without waiting for the Chief's permission, he darted towards the bush in a great leap, while the sympathetic assembly waited for his next move. It was indeed a very interesting turn, adding excitement to the usual dull procedures of the previous years. Some onlookers even shouted, 'Bravo, Kalulu.' or, 'Buck up Kalulu,' or, 'Kalulu the Greatest,' or, 'God be with you, Kalulu,' and so on. After a sufficient lapse of time, Kalulu emerged from the bush in a great flutter, took up the bowl of 'boiling' water from the ground and in one draught drank up and emptied the whole contents. The crowd went into a mad frenzy of songs and dancing, congratulating Kalulu in good cheer. All those young men who were waiting their turn behind Kalulu, heaved a sigh of relief, for they need not undergo the ordeal any more. But the Chief's face went pale, while that of his pretty daughter grew angry and ashamed. For, after all their tricks to eliminate the unsuitable young men, she was now landed with this nobody of a Hare! She felt very much humiliated and burst into tears.
Kalulu thought it punishment enough for her, and asked her to choose a human man in a sensible way. This question settled, Kalulu made sure that the Chief too stood by the promise he had given to Kalulu. Thereafter, there was peace and plenty in that land.

According to an early Zambian belief, the sky was like a roof over the earth. It was so low, that the people could reach and touch it. At certain places it was even hanging down loose, like a mosquito net that we use over our beds at night. The Gods and Spirits of our forefathers lived inside this sky, and they could always listen to the prayers, songs, chatter and squabbles taking place on earth. The sky was so low, that the people could talk to the Gods and get their wishes fulfilled immediately. They could also get their quarrels and differences sorted out as quickly. But the Gods had no rest. The incessant chatter of women was a constant nuisance to them. In addition, the children often wiped their dirty hands on the loose folds of the sky and made the abode of Gods very filthy. For a long time the Gods and the Ancestors could not solve their problem, and had to put up with the thoughtlessness of the human beings. One day, after harvest time, all the women of the earth gathered together and started pounding their corn in a countless number of mortars with long and heavy pounding sticks. As the sticks were raised and lowered, the women also started poking and punching the face of the sky, this way and that, all over the place. Some of the Gods were knocked and pushed around violently.
To add to this, the ceaseless chatter of the women was deafening. So much so that the Gods had to have an urgent meeting called and decided that the sky must be raised quite high, if they wanted to be safe from the thoughtlessness of the talkative women. At a moment's notice they raised the sky so high that the women of the earth could insult the Gods no more. Ever since then, the sky has remained where we see it today. Along with the sky, the Gods too stay far away from the easy reach of any ordinary human beings. So, you see, this is how the foolish chatter of silly unthinking women drove the sky and the Gods far away from us.

Chipila and Zongwe were friends. They lived in adjacent huts and owned adjacent pieces of land. They helped each other with the tilling, hoeing, sowing and reaping. They were such good friends, that peeple called them the Twin Gods. One day, the Twin Gods were tilling Zongwe's land. They sang and chatted merrily as they worked. Suddenly Zongwe felt dizzy. He ignored it for a while, but the heat was oppressive and he fainted. Chipila, his friend, helped him into his hut and made him comfortable. He then called the village elders in, to look after Zongwe. When they assured Chipila that it was nothing serious, Chipila went back to Zongwe's land to resume tilling, so that they would not lose precious time.  As he tilled, he found that a particular spot on the ground sounded peculiarly hollow. He tilled a little more and discovered a rotting piece of wood. He heaved it upwards to remove it from the ground. As he did so, he was amazed to find underneath, a narrow ditch with lined walls. It was roomy and held four gourds. Chipila wondered who could have left them there. His first thought was that Zongwe's elders must have buried gourds of sugar-cane liquor to ferment there, and then had forgotten them. In that case, he thought, he should not disturb them until they were ready to be drunk.
And yet his curiosity spurred him on. He wanted to know what was inside. He carefully removed the skin cap that covered the mouth of the first gourd. His eyes grew round with awe. The gourd was full of cowrie shells. This was indeed a great treasure that the ancestors of Zongwe had buried there. Zongwe must be the descendant of a very great family. Chipila's eyes grew rounder and rounder as he opened the second and the third gourds, and found them also filled with cowries. His heart swelled with joy. His first impulse was to run shouting to Zongwe and drag him out to show how lucky he was to have such a great treasure on his land. Next moment, Chipila's thoughts changed. 'Why should I tell Zongwe?' he reasoned. 'I found it, so it is mine. The finder is the keeper.' Chipila got busy. He Opened the fourth gourd. But his heart sank with disappointment to find it only half full. 'If only this too was full,' he mused, 'I would be the richest man here.' He was not at all satisfied with the fourth gourd. But he hurriedly took the four gourds and hid them deep in a cave. Later he filled the hole in the ground with plenty of tilled soil. It helped him immensely that most of the villagers were with the sick Zongwe in his hut. Chipila could do his wicked deed undisturbed.
At dusk he made a great show of concern for Zongwe. He sat with him and reassured him over again that the tilling on his land was done and the sowing could begin straight away. But not a word escaped his lips about the gourds of cowries. Chipila's mind was constantly nagged by the unfilled gourd. He thought of ways and means to fill it. He worried about it. He had completely forgotten that there were three other gourds full of cowries. Strangely enough, he was utterly and miserably preoccupied with the fourth gourd alone. As days went by, his whole life seemed to centre around that one half-filled gourd. He began to economize. Every cowrie he earned, he dropped into the gourd. The gourd swallowed all the cowries that he put in and remained at the same level. He started selling his animals, clothes, old cooking pots and such like to obtain more cowries. He then sold his precious shield and spear. When he found that this too did not fill the gourd, he sold his hut. He was pleased to find that the level was rising slowly. But it was still not full. So Chipila sold all his ancestral property including his piece of land. All the elders advised him not to be so foolish. But the greedy youth would not listen to good advice. He became rude and annoyed if peeple stood in his way.
He began to gamble and cheat, to get more cowries. He worked on other people's land to earn more cowries. If he was not satisfied with the wages, he grew angry and fought. Chipila, who was once so sweet-tempered had turned into an aggressive fiend because of his greed and discontent. In spite of all his efforts, the fourth gourd remained unfilled for a long, long time. Chipila became very impatient. He had become so unfriendly, that even Zongwe had to stay away from him to avoid trouble. Zongwe was very unhappy that his friend was wasting his health and youth in such a foolish manner. He could not understand Chipila's strange behaviour at all. At times he even suspected that some evil people had set witchcraft to work on Chipila. Yet, Zongwe offered shelter and food to Chipila in his own hut and watched over him with great care and tenderness. Chipila started stealing things from people and bartering them outside his village. This pilfering went on for a while, till Zongwe got busy with harvesting on his land. As Chipila had become an unreliable loafer, Zongwe had to take the help of others. When the work was over, Zongwe stored part of the produce in a huge kiln for future use, and bartered the rest of the corn for a skin bag full of cowries. This bag attracted the attention of greedy Chipila.
His wish to fill his gourd grew. Chipila began to watch for the moment when he could steal Zongwe's bag and run to the cave. His chance came early one morning, when Zongwe was fast asleep. Kind, trusting Zongwe had left the bag unattended in the corner of the hut. Chipila crept out of his bed, grasped the bag with both hands and quietly left the hut. Chipila's greed had made him forget that it was Zongwe who had fed and sheltered him all along. His greed blinded him completely. In a short time, Chipila found himself in the cave. He hurriedly undid the string from the bag and eagerly poured all the contents into the fourth gourd. Instantly the gourd filled up to the brim and overflowed, while some of the cowries scattered all around him. What a great relief! How glad he was! 'Hee hee hee, ha ha ha!' Chipila laughed with great satisfaction, until the cave echoed with his laughter. 'I have done it! I have done it!' he repeated several times. 'Hee hee hee, ha ha' came another laugh from within the cave. Chipila turned round to see who it was. There, in front of him stood the most evil-looking spirit any human had ever seen. Chipila's mouth and eyes opened wide with awe, for that was truly the spirit of an ancestor, a greedy old man though he might have been. 'Hee hee hee, my son,' continued the spirit with a ghastly smile, 'you have indeed done it.
I have been waiting all these years for someone to fill the fourth gourd for me. Now my wish is fulfilled, and I am deeply thankful to you!' Laughing aloud, the greedy spirit vanished into thin air, taking all the four gourds with it.

A long time ago, deep in the African jungle, there was a glade, where a certain tribe of people had built their huts and lived peacefully. In their midst were a skinny old man and his wife, a skinny old woman. These two were always complaining of their hunger and poverty. Naturally, all the good neighbours took pity on them and often invited them to share a meal with them. However, whenever they visited a hut, they made it a point to steal something to keep for themselves. Soon the kind neighbours started suspecting the old couple. Their suspicion was confirmed one day, when the skinny old couple stole a leather bag full of cowrie shells from a sick man. The sick man was too sick to get up from bed when the couple stole into the hut and carried the bag away. In those days, the cowrie shells were used in the place of money, and a bag full of cowrie shells meant a very great fortune. Hence, it would be a very great loss for the sick man to lose them. Even in his delirious condition, the sick man recognized the old couple and shouted with all his might for help. By the time the neighbours heard his cries and came to his aid, the scraggy old couple had run away to hide the treasure. The neighbours searched the couple's poor shabby hut thoroughly, but could not find any trace of the bag.
To add to this, the old man and his wife stoutly denied having anything to do with it, and insisted that it was all the ravings of a very sick man, who was imagining things. But as soon as the neighbours left their hut to think things over, the old couple grabbed the bag of cowries from the hiding place and started running towards the deep jungle. Just in time someone spotted them and raised an alarm. And so, all the village came running after the culprits. To escape from them, the skinny old couple clambered up a tall stout tree, and decided to wait there until the people moved away. However, the people were determined to catch the cunning old scarecrows and punish them severely. For a long time the people were sitting and standing around the tree. Some of them even started building small shelters all around to cook their food. Soon the whole village built several huts there to keep watch over the old couple. Days and months and years passed. While the people kept their vigil, the skinny old couple still clung on to the top of the tree. From the many huts down below, the rich smell of fried fish and fowl came up to their nostrils and turned their inside with longing. The couple felt more and more miserable, day by day, due to their increased hunger, but all they could do was to eat the fruits of the tree first, then the leaves.
During winter time, when there was nothing else growing on the tree, the hungry old couple stripped off the bark of the tree and chewed it for food. The cold and rain severely affected them at first, but soon they began to grow protective hair all over their bodies to keep them warm. Their hands gradually turned into rough claws, because they had clung on to the tree far too long. Now they had almost forgotten how to speak. Suddenly one morning, the skinny old man woke up and said, 'I have a very peculiar feeling at the end of my spine, as if it is growing!' The skinny old woman looked at him and said. 'Indeed, you are growing a tail!' They stared at each other for a moment, then the woman said, I believe I too am growing a tail!' 'Indeed, you are growing a tail like mine!' exclaimed the skinny old man. Those were the last human words they ever spoke to each other, because all their speech afterwards turned into chattering and gibbering. They no longer resembled their former human selves. As their tails grew longer and longer, they learned to jump from tree to tree. One day, while fighting over a fruit, they dropped the bag of cowries down on the ground. It never occurred to them to pick it up again, because by then they had completely forgotten the value of the cowrie shells.
The villagers waiting at the foot of the tree picked the bag up and shared the contents among themselves, as the sick man had already died, being tired of the long wait. Soon afterwards the scraggy old couple disappeared into the thick jungle. Today, when monkeys come near the huts, the people jeer at them and say that they are the descendants of the skinny old couple, who stole the bag of cowrie shells long ago.

Muti was an orphan. She lost her parents when she was very very small. To add to this misfortune, she was also not goodlooking. As a result, no one bothered to care for her or teach her the needs of everyday life. She spent most of her time roaming in the village, lazing on the grassy fields or just gazing into space. Some kind people gave her old skins to tie round her body and left overs to eat. But there was none to love her. It was in this atmosphere that Muti grew up into a maiden. She started watching people around her. While all other girls of her age found good husbands, no young man came forward to marry her. She felt hurt when people made comments about her unkempt appearance and crude manners. When she played with little children, they taunted her for being childish. If she tried to talk to older women, they snubbed her by saying that she was too young to join in the big people's conversation. Muti became more and more puzzled and vexed by such treatment, until one day, she could bear the insult no longer. She went to a quiet corner and began to weep. Suddenly she felt someone gently stroking her hair. Muti looked up and found an old man standing beside her. 'That is a sorry sight,' he said, 'why are you so sad, my child?' Between sobs Muti explained to him everything. 'Never mind,' he consoled her, 'come with me. My clever wife will be able to help you.'
He then took Muti to his wife who really looked very, very clever. 'Muti,' the old woman addressed her sternly, 'you must promise to do whatever I ask you to do. In the end, if you prove that you deserve a husband, I will get you one.' Muti was so eager to get a husband, that she promised again and again that she would do any work for the old woman. From the next day Muti was set to work from morning till night, each day and every day. She had to clean the hut, thatch the roof, mend the skin, make ropes, knit fish-nets, cook food and do many more chores. Muti was always puzzled as to how she should begin each chore, because she had never had any training before. Now she was too scared of the old woman to ask for any guidance. Whenever she found herself in such predicament, she thought of the husband she was promised, and completed any job assigned to her, in her own clumsy way. Yet to her great amazement, the old woman always seemed to be very pleased with her efforts. One day she told the girl, 'Muti, there is a thicket on the north side of our hut. Go and clear it. In that place you should then build a small hut for yourself to stay in.' As usual, Muti was perplexed at this enormous task. However, with a heavy heart she began the work. To her own joy, in three days time Muti had built a little hut there, all by herself. She was very much excited to see her own achievement.
Shouting and crying with joy, she ran to the old woman. 'Where is the husband you promised?' she demanded breathlessly, 'he can now live in the new hut I have made. Come and see it yourselfl' 'Don't be so hasty,' the old woman replied harshly, 'there is something else to be done.' 'What is it?' Muti asked, a little put out. 'Tomorrow morning you must knit a fish-net,' ordered the unkind woman, 'take it to the river and catch a male fish. Be sure it has no cut or blemish on its body.' She then gave Muti an earthen pot. 'Half fill this pot with water. Put the fish in it. Cover it with a large leaf and then bring it to me.' The next day Muti was very busy. It took her more time than she had expected. Every fish that she caught turned out to be a female, and most of the male ones had one blemish or another. It was past midday when she caught one to her full satisfaction. She then took it to the old woman as directed. 'Now you can go and rest in your new hut,' the woman said and added, 'exactly on the fifth day from today, wake up before anyone else, and come to have a peep at this pot.' Muti really needed the rest and left for her hut. For four days she had no work to do. Exactly on the fifth day, Muti woke up at dawn, slipped out of her hut and went into the old woman's hut. The pot was still standing in a corner. Quietly Muti raised the dried leaf that was the cover.
My! What a surprise she had! 'Good morning, my wife!' greeted a tiny man from inside the pot. A thrill passed through Muti. She saw a man, no bigger than the fish she had caught from the river. As she was gazing with wonder and admiration at this little man, the old woman stole up behind her. 'That is your husband. Muti,' she said, 'take him home to your hut and look after him carefully.' Muti was only too glad to do so. But the old woman put up a warning finger. 'Remember, Muti,' she warned, 'under no circumstances should you eat anything that your husband eats. If you forget this, you will regret it.' Muti promised to be careful, and took her tiny husband joyfully to her hut. Muti was overwhelmed with happiness. Every day brought her new reason for wonder and gratitude. She was more and more surprised to see such a small man doing a great deal of work for her. He gathered fruit and firewood, fetched water, trapped animals and even sang songs! He generally made Muti's life very pleasant. They loved each other very intensely. By this time Muti had noticed that her husband never ate any meat or vegetables, but was always satisfied with only a certain type of red berry. She always begged him to taste all the nice things she specially cooked for him, but he flatly refused. Remembering the old woman's warning, Muti herself ate only those things that her husband did not like to eat.
Meanwhile, a severe famine struck the land. For miles around there was no water. Vegetation wilted and withered. Animals and birds perished. Human beings wandered away to new lands in search of food and water. Strangely enough, the fish-man was very active and energetic. The simple reason was that, while everything else perished, only the red berries that he ate were growing in plenty. Muti made a sacrifice to stay with him while her neighbours went away. She grew thinner every day, as she could not find even a drop of water to quench her thirst. One day it was especially very hot. Muti felt she would die, if she did not find something to wet her tongue. Her eyes fell on the basket that her tiny husband had brought in. It was full of the juicy red berries. She watched for the moment when he would be away. As soon as he went out, she shelled a handful of the berries and shoved them into her mouth with trembling fingers. She no longer heeded the old woman's warnings. Her hunger and thirst had driven her to do this desperate thing. Oh, but what a relief from thirst! How tasty they were! Why did she ever keep away from them so long? These dreams lasted only for a few minutes. She heard the husband come into the hut. Hastily she tried to hide the shells behind the cooking pots. However, his sharp eyes had seen her, and he understood what she had just done. He stood stone for a moment as if stunned.
'Muti, my wife,' he groaned, all his energy failing him, 'look what you have done! You have deceived me! Now we must part!' With those words he ran towards the dry river. Muti followed him, frantically crying and yelling for him to stop. She apologized  over and over again, as she ran behind him. But the fish-man had gone. He had once again changed into a fish, and dug into the sand to find water. Muti was heart-broken. She melted into her own tears and mingled with the dry sand.

Chanda married Milika, because she was a beautiful girl. Her modesty and wisdom only added to her beauty. They led a very happy life together for five years, but they slowly became sad, because they did not have any children. Chanda's relatives started persuading him to marry another girl, as Milika had no children. Whenever they spoke about this in Milika's presence, she wept with bitterness, but Chanda loved her and promised that he would never send her away. Milika was a sensible girl and she felt it was her duty to see that her husband had children, whom he could call his own. Therefore she searched for a good girl who would deserve to be the second wife for Chanda. Soon she came across a hunter's daughter called Eneli who satisfied all the qualities she was looking for. Milika asked Chanda to take Eneli as his second wife. At first Chanda refused, but Milika's repeated requests and tears made him agree in the end. The marriage was celebrated amidst great rejoicing among Chanda's relatives, for Chanda was a rich man and could afford two wives. Eneli came to live with Chanda and Milika. A year later Eneli gave birth to a son. The elders and relatives showered presents and honour on Eneli, while Milika was left to do all the washing and fetching and cooking for all the visitors who came and went, as they pleased. She worked so much, so that she had scarcely any time left, even to look at the new-born baby.
This saddened her. She wanted to hold him and fondle him, but she had no time. To add to this, Eneli was complaining that  the child took all her time and so she could not attend to any household chores any more. Therefore, it was decided that Milika should look after all the housework, while Eneli attended to the pleasant job of looking after her little son and her husband. Chanda began loving Eneli more and more, because she had given him a son. There came a time when he even forgot that Milika was in the same house. She was being treated as a mere housemaid, who looked after the comfort of others. At times she had to put up with harsh words. However she stayed in the same house, because she felt that a woman's place was with her own husband. In a few years' time, Eneli bore many more children and became the honoured lady of the house, while Milika remained virtually, a housemaid. When the children were growing up, drought struck the land. Like his neighbours, Chanda also prepared to move his cows and oxen. He wanted to take his family to a more suitable place. He tied two sturdy oxen to his cart and ordered all his children and Eneli to get into it. Just as they were about to move off, Milika came running with her own personal belongings and tried to clamber in. 'Where do you think you are going?' Chanda asked mockingly. 'Get down. You are not going with us. I cannot afford two wives any more, in this drought.
Stay here and look after the house.' This harsh and stern command was so unexpected, that Milika was dumbfounded. She hurriedly got down. This appeared so comical that the small children burst out laughing. Even Eneli laughed aloud. Milika had accepted all the indifference and ill-treatment for so long, but this humiliation from her husband, in front of the children and his young wife wounded her heart very deeply. She ran weeping into the house, as Chanda and his family moved off unconcerned. Milika was much hurt. In her despair, she cried aloud, calling all the spirits of all her ancestors. 'Fathers of my father!' she sobbed, 'how can you ever let me be insulted for no wrong done by me? Have I not suffered enough agony? Give me children who would make me happy and bring honour to me and to themselves. Wipe out all the insults heaped on me by Eneli and her children.' Milika wept so long and so bitterly, that she fell asleep. In her dream, one of her ancestors called to her softly. 'Milika, Milika . . .' he whispered, 'your troubles are all over. Go to the ancestral shrine tomorrow and offer a monkey fruit.' When she woke up, she felt it strange that anyone could ask her to offer a monkey fruit to the spirits. She took up courage and chose the best monkey fruit to take to the shrine. Just as she lay the fruit at the shrine and knelt down to pray, she heard a crash as if something broke.
Looking up, she saw the useless fruit split into two, and three beautiful girls emerged from within. 'Mother, mother!' they shouted, 'we have come to live with you. Please promise that you would never speak a harsh word to us!' Milika's joy knew no bounds. Scooping the three girls in her arms, she ran home, all the while thanking the spirits for this special gift. She promised the girls that she would never ever say a harsh word to them. Life was happy again. Rains returned and the land flourished. People came back to resettle on the land. Milika's daughters grew up to be useful and diligent young maidens. 'If only I had a son . . .' Milika wished often, 'if only one of them was a son, life would have been much better.' Again Milika had a dream of the same spirit, asking her to offer a monkey fruit at the shrine. As before, when she placed it there, it split into two and three healthy boys came out of it calling, 'Mother, mother, we have come to live with you. Please promise that you would never scold us.' Milika promised that, and took them home. Her heart was filled with gratitude. The boys grew up to be hunters and farmers. Milika's children were admired by all the people. They brought her honour, riches and happiness. Soon it was time for them to get married. Milika gave away her two daughters in marriage to the neighbouring chieftains. The first two sons married beautiful young girls and set up their own homes.
Wherever she went, Milika was treated with great respect because of her children, but there was just one worry in her heart. Chanda and his second wife Eneli had never returned to the house to see her glorious life. She had never had the opportunity to show off in front of them. Besides, the youngest son and the youngest daughter still remained unsettled. When these two young children were also properly settled to a good life, she thought, she would go in search of her husband and Eneli and show them how she had thrived in spite of their ill-treatment of her. As days went by, she grew more and more impatient. This impatience grew into exasperation and finally anger. 'Why don't you two ever get settled?' she scolded them one day. 'Are you not old enough to marry and start a life of your own, and raise a family?' The boy and the girl looked up in great sorrow. 'Our human mother has scolded us,' they chanted plaintively in unison, 'we, born of the fruit, must go back to the fruit.' This chant grew louder and louder, before Milika could understand its meaning. Her angry words had drawn all her children to the house, from far and wide. They were all chanting the same words over and over again. When the sixth one also arrived at the scene, they all linked hands and walked towards the monkey fruit tree. Still chanting the same doleful words, they all entered into one of the fruits, one by one and thus disappeared from all human eyes.
The whole village came to watch them  disappear, but none could do anything to get them back.

Long, long ago, in the middle of a dark forest in the Congo, there lived a Jackal. He was big and strong and all the other animals were afraid of him. At nightfall every evening, he would take his gold-tipped bamboo spear and go out hunting. One night, as he set out into the forest, the Moon, up in the sky, was watching him, as he hunted among the trees with his gold-tipped spear. In a few hours' time, he had killed two Kudus and a wild Pig. The Moon became jealous of the Jackal's success and planned to steal the spear. So, the next night, as the Jackal returned home after killing four Bushbucks, the Moon came out from behind a cloud and watched him to see where he hid his spear. She saw him hiding it behind a cupboard. The next day, an Owl knocked at the Jackal's door. It was really the Moon in disguise. 'What do you want?' demanded the  Jackal. 'Please, Sir,' replied the Owl, 'I have come from a far off land. Pray, let me sleep in your house tonight.' '0h, all right,' agreed the Jackal. That night, when all was quiet, the Moon took the spear out of its hiding place and tried to run away with it. But, she tripped over a big drum and the noise brought the Jackal running to the spot. 'Go away, miserable thief!' he shouted, when he saw what had happened. The Moon went back to her home in the sky. The next day she disguised herself as a Cat, and went again to the Jackal's house and knocked at the door.
'What do you want?' asked the Jackal. 'Please, Sir,' replied the Cat, 'I have come from a far off land. Pray, let me sleep in your house tonight.' 'Oh, all right,' agreed the Jackal. That night, when all was quiet, the Moon once again stole the spear. But, just as she was going out of the door, she knocked against some cooking pots. The noise once again brought the Jackal running to the spot. 'Two thieves in two nights!' he growled, 'go away, and don't come back!' The Moon went back home, but she was determined to have a last try. So the next day, she knocked again at the Jackal's door, but this time, without a disguise. 'What do you want?' asked the Jackal, in his usual gruff voice. 'It is so cold up there in the sky,' replied the Moon, 'please let me sleep in one of your cosy beds tonight.' After his bad experience, the Jackal was reluctant to grant the Moon's request, but her charming manner soon made him change his mind. So, that night, when all was quiet, the Moon took the gold-tipped spear for the third time. She managed to get out of the Jackal's house, but in the garden she fell over a bucket. The Jackal woke up but was not quick enough to catch the Moon this time, as she was already high up in the sky. The gold-tipped spear had a magic power that enabled the Jackal to hunt successfully, but now, without it, he was helpless. He became thin and sickly, and the only food he got was the left overs from other animals' meals.
So, to this day, the Jackal climbs a hill at night and howls at the Moon to make her return his spear.

There was once a woman, a hunter's wife, living in a little village, deep in the woods. She was very clever in making dolls and other figures out of clay, wood—gum or bees' wax. She used to give them away to little children in her village. During the rainy season, her husband would collect a number of honeycombs, and store the honey in earthen pots or gourds. The woman gathered the wax from the combs and used it for her own amusement. Once she had gathered enough wax to mould two beautiful maidens, as large as real human beings. When the work was completed, she was herself so struck with their beauty and grace, that she wished intensely for them to come alive and sing and talk to her. In all her prayers to her ancestral spirits, she asked for this boon. Sure enough, the ancestral spirits listened to her plea, and the wax-maidens came alive. This was a great occasion for the whole village to celebrate. Life became very pleasant for the hunter and his wife, when they had these two daughters of their own. After a long time, when everyone had accepted the wax-maidens as normal human beings, a young farmer from another village happened to see them, when they were sitting in the cool shade under a tree. Not knowing who they really were, he wondered that such wax-like, pale beauties could exist in the world. Full of admiration for them, he returned to his own village. Since that day he could think of nothing else.
He wondered if they were strange, beautiful spirits who haunted young men, or whether they were real human beings, whom one could marry. He was all the more thoughtful, because he was a married man, and wondered whether his first wife would allow him to marry more wives. But he was desperately in love with the two maidens and pined away thinking of them. Observing his dejection, his first wife asked for the reason. Reluctantly he revealed to her what had happened. Being a dutiful wife, she gave him permission to marry the wax-maidens, on condition that they too shared in the housework and hard tilling work in the field, because she honestly believed that the wives could together greatly increase their wealth. This was enough encouragement for the young farmer. He hastened to the wax-maidens' parents with his proposal of marriage. His status in life satisfied them. His straight and honest conduct won the parents' admiration. They agreed to celebrate the marriage, when the young farmer paid them eight head of cattle, four goats and six hens as the 'Lobola' or the bride-price for the much valued wax-maidens. However, the parents warned him that their daughters were delicate creatures, who should be treated very gently. They should not be allowed to work in hot and sunny places, nor allowed to exert themselves too much. If he neglected this warning, they would melt away. In his over-eagerness to marry them, the foolish young farmer agreed to this condition.
However, he did not reveal this truth to his first wife, for fear that she would scold him for marrying useless women, and prevent the marriage. After the ceremony, the young farmer proudly brought his beautiful brides home. The moment they set their feet in the house, the first wife realized what a tremendous mistake it was. The maidens looked so dainty that she knew they had never done any housework at all. Their hands were so soft and sleek, they were utterly unfit for hard work in the fields. They walked so straight, that they could never carry loads on their heads nor babies on their backs. What a waste of the 'Lobola'! Besides, she noticed day by day, they were both in great dread of the fire. They refused to cook food on the hearth and always preferred to eat cold things. They avoided long exhausting walks and generally became tired all too soon. Most of all, they would never venture out into the open, sunny fields to do the important work of the farmer. For a few months the first wife tolerated this dainty nonsense, and carried on with all the chores, single handed. Soon however, the additional work of catering for the lazy women proved too much for the simple woman. It was infuriating. While she toiled away like a mule, the two pale creatures enjoyed the cool comfort of the house. Tearfully, the bitter woman complained to her husband about the attitude of his new wives.
The foolish men only laughed, because it suited him perfectly to have two beautiful women to entertain him with sweet songs and talk, while a hard-working woman looked after all the other chores in the house. He never explained to her the reason for their laziness, but carried on without paying any heed to his first wife's complaints. Seeing her husband's heartless behaviour, the first wife confided in her neighbours, who advised her to use her wit to extract work from the lazy women, when the husband was not in the house. Since that day, she pretended to be kind to the wax-maidens in her husband's presence, but when he was away, she set hard work for the girls to do. She demanded obedience, as the first wife, and supervised all their chores untiringly. But the hard work severely told on the poor helpless creatures. The waxen beauty began to wear from their face and hands, they became lean and listless. Nevertheless, the revengeful wife drove them into the field to till the land. The elder one ran to the field. In great alarm, the younger maiden begged for mercy, because she feared her sister would surely melt away in the hot sun. 'Nonsense,' retorted the first wife, 'no woman ever melts away by working in the sun.' Under the midday sun, the elder maiden actually began to melt. The wax dripped down from her body and ran on the soil. The young sister watched helplessly, because she could not go to her rescue.
By evening she had melted so much that only a big toe from her foot remained on the field. In the cool of the evening, the young one ventured out to collect the toe and placed it in a pot of cold water. Not wishing to stay in the house any longer, she went to her mother's house, lamenting her sister's fate. When the young husband returned in the evening, his first wife was still enjoying her leisure, believing the wax-maidens to be at work. But the food was not cooked, the field was not tilled and the wax-maidens were nowhere to be seen. Frantic with anxiety for the safety of his beloved wax-maidens, the young husband ran to the village of the maidens, only to learn the sad news, and to see the only remaining wax toe of the beauty. Due to the long walk and her heavy heart, the young sister too had melted into a grotesque lump of wax, beyond anyone's recognition. Tearing off into the dark night, an anguished cry escaped the lips of the distracted husband, as he blindly ran into the woods, never to return.

This story took place a long time ago, when strange things used to happen off and on. In those days a man and his wife lived in a country full of happy people. The couple had four healthy sons, but they yearned for a little daughter. When the wife was expecting their fifth child, they hoped it would be different this time, a girl child, for example. The man and his wife prayed day and night, repeating the same words, 'Please, God, make it different this time, make it different this time.' They could not say anything else. When finally the day came, when the mother went into labour, the father fell on his knees, requesting all the Gods and Spirits to remember their prayer, and make it different. In a few hours' time the mother was safely delivered of a handsome baby, and an old nurse brought the news to the father. 'Glad news, master,' she informed him politely, 'it is, indeed, different this time.' 'Different?' gasped the father in exultation. 'God be thanked a thousandfold!' 'Yes, different,' announced the old woman solemnly, 'the lady of this house has just given birth to a handsome little puppy dog!' 'What?' The father was at first greatly shocked at this news. He stood petrified for some time, but when once he set eyes on the cute little puppy dog, all his anger vanished, and his heart melted with tender love for the soft, helpless creature. Days went by and all the family cherished the little puppy dog, because of his lovable, gentle nature.
He followed his elder brothers wherever they went, and guarded his father's home and property with devotion. Even as a baby, he was no trouble to his mother, as he was the most obedient child anyone could ever want. All the world adored him. When the boys grew up to be strong, handsome young men, the father bade them to seek their fortune in the wide world, on their own merit, because, he said, it would not be manly for them to stay protected in the parental home any more. He gave them good advice and his blessings. Later, he also gave each of his sons a hoe, and a sharp knife with which to fend for himself. The mother tied up some food in five identical bundles for them and sent them on their way. Now the little puppy dog had grown up to be a very strong animal, almost resembling a lion, but his nature remained as gentle as before. As he could not carry his hoe and his knife and his bundle of food, his elder brothers carried them for him. After various encounters, the young men at last arrived at the country of a good Chief. They presented themselves before the Chief and requested him to try their skill. The Chief was much impressed by their fearless, yet courteous bearing, and so, he employed them to lay a path leading from his palace to the river. Thus the cargo from the boats could be transported into the palace yard easily. This was a distance of about fifteen miles or over. In those days, it was a great distance indeed.
Yet, without a murmur, all the brothers set to work immediately, in unison. In a very short time they laid a very good passable path, on which carts, cattle, horses and men could carry their goods with comfort. While the work was going on, the little dog guarded the possessions of his elder brothers and protected them from wild animals. It was only a test to prove their skill. No need to say, they passed it with great honours. By some strange coincidence, the Chief had five beautiful daughters, whom he wanted to give away in marriage to deserving young men. The four elder brothers proved to be the best choice any parent could make as suitors to his daughters. Without a moment's hesitation, the Chief offered his four elder daughters in marriage to the four elder brothers. When the ceremony was going on, someone was very unhappy. This was none other than the Chief's youngest daughter, Nalishebo. She was very disappointed that she could not find a husband from among the hard-working brothers. Thinking it to be a joke, the elder brothers offered their puppy dog as her companion. The girl accepted the dog, and looked after him carefully. As the Chief was growing old, he gave a portion of his land to each of his daughters and bade them to lead a peaceful life. Now was the real time for competition among the elder brothers. They vied with one another in cultivating their respective lands and growing different types of produce.
They built roomy huts and homes for their families. They hunted many animals and procured warm skins. They had, in short, much to eat and drink and enjoyed a bounteous life. Nalishebo alone was left out. Being a fragile young maiden, she could not do all the work a man would do. As a result, she could hardly keep her hut clean, let alone, cultivate the land. She was tired and ashamed to have to borrow food and skins from her father or her sisters. One day she was far too dejected about her situation and spoke bitterly to the poor dog. 'Look at all my sisters,' she remarked, venting her wrath on him, 'they have good strong men to help them. But what have I got? Only a worthless dog who can only eat and sleep!' The poor dog could only whine sympathetically and wag his tail. Next morning, when Nalishebo woke up and looked out of her hut, a great surprise awaited her. As if by some strange power, the weed had been completely cleared from her land. At the back yard, several rows of newly dug beds were laid ready for planting seeds. Nalishebo wondered who could have done this good work for her. All her sisters came to see the work. There was much guessing and much talking, but none could find out who did all the work. Day after day passed, each morning bringing new reason for wonder to the young girl. One day fresh thatch was laid on the roof, the next day all land was tilled, on the third morning saplings were planted and on the fourth, there were blossoms everywhere.
Nalishebo imagined she was living in a dream-land. Even her sisters and their husbands left off teasing her, because they could not, themselves, make their lands flourish so well. They even suspected that there was some spell, good or bad, working on Nalishebo's land. Many nights they kept watch to catch the worker red-handed. But all their efforts were in vain. Once, at dead of night, Nalishebo suddenly woke up to hear the noise of someone tilling the land. She quietly slipped out of her hut. In the dim moon light she could see a young man bent over his work, in deep concentration. She had never seen any one of that stature in the neighbourhood. Her heart pounding with excitement and fear, she approached the man to have a closer look. She took a few steps forward, but suddenly she stepped on something soft and warm. As she bent down to examine the object, she screamed, 'Oh my pet, my dear dog is dead!' and tearfully she gathered the animal in her arms. Strange to say, it felt very light. Her scream alerted the working young man. He came running to her, 'Please, give me back my skin, quick!' he urged. At once everything became clear to Nalishebo. The handsome young benefactor was none other than the dog himself. By some magic power, this young man could get in and out of the dog skin, as he chose! He had been keeping this power a secret for many years, but Nalishebo accidentally discovered it that night.
The young man begged Nalishebo not to divulge the secret to anyone, because if many others knew of it, his power would wane and he would be condemned to remain a dog for ever. Such things could not be hidden from prying eyes for long. As her sisters and others suspected that she entertained a secret lover, the young girl thought of a plan to bring the matter to the open, at least to protect her own good name. In those days it was considered very important that the daughters of the Chief set an exemplary example for the other maidens of a chiefdom. If Nalishebo was proved to be a wanton maiden, she could be punished severely. Nalishebo realized that the secret of the young man would be out some day and he would be condemned to be a dog for ever. On the other hand, if she protected the secret much longer, the Chief and the elders of the country would punish her for her wayward behaviour. Therefore, when next time the young man came out of the dog skin at night, she crept up behind him to steal the skin. When he was hard at work, she burned the dog skin to ashes. It was a pity, though, to have to destroy such a smooth, healthy, lovely skin that she adored all along. This she had to do, in order to retain the young man in his human form for ever, and to extricate herself from the false stories. In this way, Nalishebo broke the spell, and married the fifth young brother, and they all lived happily ever after."

There was once a king who was very powerful. He had great influence over the wild beasts and animals. Now the tortoise was looked upon as the wisest of all beasts and men. This king had a son named Ekpenyon, to whom he gave fifty young girls as wives, but the prince did not like any of them. The king was very angry at this, and made a law that if any man had a daughter who was finer than the prince's wives, and who found favour in his son's eyes, the girl herself and her father and mother should be killed.
Now about this time the tortoise and his wife had a daughter who was very beautiful. The mother thought it was not safe to keep such a fine child, as the prince might fall in love with her, so she told her husband that her daughter ought to be killed and thrown away into the bush. The tortoise, however, was unwilling, and hid her until she was three years old. One day, when both the tortoise and his wife were away on their farm, the king's son happened to be hunting near their house, and saw a bird perched on the top of the fence round the house. The bird was watching the little girl, and was so entranced with her beauty that he did not notice the prince coming. The prince shot the bird with his bow and arrow, and it dropped inside the fence, so the prince sent his servant to gather it. While the servant was looking for the bird he came across the little girl, and was so struck with her form, that he immediately returned to his master and told him what he had seen. The prince then broke down the fence and found the child, and fell in love with her at once. He stayed and talked with her for a long time, until at last she agreed to become his wife. He then went home, but concealed from his father the fact that he had fallen in love with the beautiful daughter of the tortoise.
But the next morning he sent for the treasurer, and got sixty pieces of cloth and sent them to the tortoise. Then in the early afternoon he went down to the tortoise's house, and told him that he wished to marry his daughter. The tortoise saw at once that what he had dreaded had come to pass, and that his life was in danger, so he told the prince that if the king knew, he would kill not only himself (the tortoise), but also his wife and daughter. The prince replied that he would be killed himself before he allowed the tortoise and his wife and daughter to be killed. Eventually, after much argument, the tortoise consented, and agreed to hand his daughter to the prince as his wife when she arrived at the proper age. Then the prince went home and told his mother what he had done. She was in great distress at the thought that she would lose her son, of whom she was very proud, as she knew that when the king heard of his son's disobedience he would kill him. However, the queen, although she knew how angry her husband would be, wanted her son to marry the girl he had fallen in love with, so she went to the tortoise and gave him some money, clothes, yams, and palm-oil as further dowry on her son's behalf in order that the tortoise should not give his daughter to another man. For the next five years the prince was constantly with the tortoise's daughter, whose name was Adet, and when she was about to be put in the fatting house, the prince told his father that he was going to take Adet as his wife. On hearing this the king was very angry, and sent word all round his kingdom that all people should come on a certain day to the marketplace to hear the palaver. When the appointed day arrived the market-place was quite full of people, and the stones belonging to the king and queen were placed in the middle of the market-place.
When the king and queen arrived all the people stood up and greeted them, and they then sat down on their stones. The king then told his attendants to bring the girl Adet before him. When she arrived the king was quite astonished at her beauty. He then told the people that he had sent for them to tell them that he was angry with his son for disobeying him and taking Adet as his wife without his knowledge, but that now he had seen her himself he had to acknowledge that she was very beautiful, and that his son had made a good choice. He would therefore forgive his son.
When the people saw the girl they agreed that she was very fine and quite worthy of being the prince's wife, and begged the king to cancel the law he had made altogether, and the king agreed and as the law had been made under the "Egbo" law, he sent for eight Egbos, and told them that the order was cancelled throughout his kingdom, and that for the future no one would be killed who had a daughter more beautiful than the prince's wives, and gave the Egbos palm wine and money to remove the law, and sent them away. Then he declared that the tortoise's daughter, Adet, should marry his son, and he made them marry the same day. A great feast was then given which lasted for fifty days, and the king killed five cows and gave all the people plenty of foo-foo and palm-oil chop, and placed a large number of pots of palm wine in the streets for the people to drink as they liked. The women brought a big play to the king's compound, and there was singing and dancing kept up day and night during the whole time. The prince and his companions also played in the market square. When the feast was over the king gave half of his kingdom to the tortoise to rule over, and three hundred slaves to work on his farm. The prince also gave his father-in-law two hundred women and one hundred girls to work for him, so the tortoise became one of the richest men in the kingdom. The prince and his wife lived together for a good many years until the king died, when the prince ruled in his place. And all this shows that the tortoise is the wisest of all men and animals.

Many years ago there was a Calabar hunter called Effiong, who lived in the bush, killed plenty of animals, and made much money. Every one in the country knew him, and one of his best friends was a man called Okun, who lived near him. But Effiong was very extravagant, and spent much money in eating and drinking with every one, until at last he became quite poor, so he had to go out hunting again; but now his good luck seemed to have deserted him, for although he worked hard, and hunted day and night, he could not succeed in killing anything. One day, as he was very hungry, he went to his friend Okun and borrowed two hundred rods from him, and told him to come to his house on a certain day to get his money, and he told him to bring his gun, loaded, with him.
Now, some time before this Effiong had made friends with a leopard and a bush cat, whom he had met in the forest whilst on one of his hunting expeditions; and he had also made friends with a goat and a cock at a farm where he had stayed for the night. But though Effiong had borrowed the money from Okun, he could not think how he was to repay it on the day he had promised. At last, however, he thought of a plan, and on the next day he went to his friend the leopard, and asked him to lend him two hundred rods, promising to return the amount to him on the same day as he had promised to pay Okun; and he also told the leopard, that if he were absent when he came for his money, he could kill anything he saw in the house and eat it. The leopard was then to wait until the hunter arrived, when he would pay him the money; and to this the leopard agreed. The hunter then went to his friend the goat, and borrowed two hundred rods from him in the same way. Effiong also went to his friends the bush cat and the cock, and borrowed two hundred rods from each of them on the same conditions, and told each one of them that if he were absent when they arrived, they could kill and eat anything they found about the place.
When the appointed day arrived the hunter spread some corn on the ground, and then went away and left the house deserted. Very early in the morning, soon after he had begun to crow, the cock remembered what the hunter had told him, and walked over to the hunter's house, but found no one there. On looking round, however, he saw some corn on the, ground, and, being hungry, he commenced to eat. About this time the bush cat also arrived, and not finding the hunter at home, he, too, looked about, and very soon he espied the cock, who was busy picking up the grains of corn. So the bush cat went up very softly behind and pounced on the cock and killed him at once, and began to eat him. By this time the goat had come for his money; but not finding his friend, he walked about until he came upon the bush cat, who was so intent upon his meal off the cock, that he did not notice the goat approaching; and the goat, being in rather a bad temper at not getting his money, at once charged at the bush cat and knocked him over, butting him with his horns. This the bush cat did not like at all, so, as he was not big enough to fight the goat, he picked up the remains of the cock and ran off with it to the bush, and so lost his money, as he did not await the arrival of the hunter. The goat was thus left master of the situation and started bleating, and this noise attracted the attention of the leopard, who was on his way to receive payment from the hunter. As he got nearer the smell of goat became very strong, and being hungry, for he had not eaten anything for some time, he approached the goat very carefully. Not seeing any one about he stalked the goat and got nearer and nearer, until he was within springing distance. The goat, in the meantime, was grazing quietly, quite unsuspicious of any danger, as he was in his friend the hunter's compound. Now and then he would say Ba!! But most of the time he was busy eating the young grass, and picking up the leaves which had fallen from a tree of which he was very fond. Suddenly the leopard sprang at the goat, and with one crunch at the neck brought him down. The goat was dead almost at once, and the leopard started on his meal.
It was now about eight o'clock in the morning, and Okun, the hunter's friend, having had his early morning meal, went out with his gun to receive payment of the two hundred rods he had lent to the hunter. When he got close to the house he heard a crunching sound, and, being a hunter himself, he approached very cautiously, and looking over the fence saw the leopard only a few yards off busily engaged eating the goat. He took careful aim at the leopard and fired, whereupon the leopard rolled over dead. The death of the leopard meant that four of the hunter's creditors were now disposed of, as the bush cat had killed the cock, the goat had driven the bush cat away (who thus forfeited his claim), and in his turn the goat had been killed by the leopard, who had just been slain by Okun. This meant a saving of eight hundred rods to Effiong; but he was not content with this, and directly he heard the report of the gun he ran out from where he had been hiding all the time, and found the leopard lying dead with Okun standing over it. Then in very strong language Effiong began to upbraid his friend, and asked him why he had killed his old friend the leopard, that nothing would satisfy him but that he should report the whole matter to the king, who would no doubt deal with him as he thought fit. When Effiong said this Okun was frightened, and begged him not to say anything more about the matter, as the king would be angry; but the hunter was obdurate, and refused to listen to him; and at last Okun said, "If you will allow the whole thing to drop and will say no more about it, I will make you a present of the two hundred rods you borrowed from me." This was just what Effiong wanted, but still he did not give in at once; eventually, however, he agreed, and told Okun he might go, and that he would bury the body of his friend the leopard.
Directly Okun had gone, instead of burying the body Effiong dragged it inside the house and skinned it very carefully. The skin he put out to dry in the sun, and covered it with wood ash, and the body he ate. When the skin was well cured the hunter took it to a distant market, where he sold it for much money. And now, whenever a bush cat sees a cock he always kills it, and does so by right, as he takes the cock in part payment of the two hundred rods which the hunter never paid him.

Eyamba I. of Calabar was a very powerful king. He fought and conquered all the surrounding countries, killing all the old men and women, but the able-bodied men and girls he caught and brought back as slaves, and they worked on the farms until they died.
This king had two hundred wives, but none of them had borne a son to him. His subjects, seeing that he was becoming an old man, begged him to marry one of the spider's daughters, as they always had plenty of children. But when the king saw the spider's daughter he did not like her, as she was ugly, and the people said it was because her mother had had so many children at the same time. However, in order to please his people he married the ugly girl, and placed her among his other wives, but they all complained because she was so ugly, and said she could not live with them. The king, therefore, built her a separate house for herself, where she was given food and drink the same as the other wives. Every one jeered at her on account of her ugliness; but she was not really ugly, but beautiful, as she was born with two skins, and at her birth her mother was made to promise that she should never remove the ugly skin until a certain time arrived save only during the night, and that she must put it on again before dawn. Now the king's head wife knew this, and was very fearful lest the king should find it out and fall in love with the spider's daughter; so she went to a Ju Ju man and offered him two hundred rods to make a potion that would make the king forget altogether that the spider's daughter was his wife. This the Ju Ju man finally consented to do, after much haggling over the price, for three hundred and fifty rods; and he made up some "medicine," which the head wife mixed with the king's food. For some months this had the effect of making the king forget the spider's daughter, and he used to pass quite close to her without recognising her in any way. When four months had elapsed and the king had not once sent for Adiaha (for that was the name of the spider's daughter), she began to get tired, and went back to her parents. Her father, the spider, then took her to another Ju Ju man, who, by making spells and casting lots, very soon discovered that it was the king's head wife who had made the Ju Ju and had enchanted the king so that he would not look at Adiaha. He therefore told the spider that Adiaha should give the king some medicine which he would prepare, which would make the king remember her. He prepared the medicine, for which the spider had to pay a large sum of money; and that very day Adiaha made a small dish of food, into which she had placed the medicine, and presented it to the king. Directly he had eaten the dish his eyes were opened and he recognised his wife, and told her to come to him that very evening. So in the afternoon, being very joyful, she went down to the river and washed, and when she returned she put on her best cloth and went to the king's palace.
Directly it was dark and all the lights were out she pulled off her ugly skin, and the king saw how beautiful she was, and was very pleased with her; but when the cock crowed Adiaha pulled on her ugly skin again, and went back to her own house.
This she did for four nights running, always taking the ugly skin off in the dark, and leaving before daylight in the morning. In course of time, to the great surprise of all the people, and particularly of the king's two hundred wives, she gave birth to a son; but what surprised them most of all was that only one son was born, whereas her mother had always had a great many children at a time, generally about fifty.
The king's head wife became more jealous than ever when Adiaha had a son; so she went again to the Ju Ju man, and by giving him a large present induced him to give her some medicine which would make the king sick and forget his son. And the medicine would then make the king go to the Ju Ju man, who would tell him that it was his son who had made him sick, as he wanted to reign instead of his father. The Ju Ju man would also tell the king that if he wanted to recover he must throw his son away into the water.
And the king, when he had taken the medicine., went to the Ju Ju man, who told him everything as had been arranged with the head wife. But at first the king did not want to destroy his son. Then his chief subjects begged him to throw his son away, and said that perhaps in a year's time he might get another son. So the king at last agreed, and threw his son into the river, at which the mother grieved and cried bitterly.
Then the head wife went again to the Ju Ju man and got more medicine, which made the king forget Adiaha for three years, during which time she was in mourning for her son. She then returned to her father, and he got some more medicine from his Ju Ju man, which Adiaha gave to the king. And the king knew her and called her to him again, and she lived with him as before. Now the Ju Ju who had helped Adiaha's father, the spider, was a Water Ju Ju, and he was ready when the king threw his son into the water, and saved his life and took him home and kept him alive. And the boy grew up very strong.
After a time Adiaha gave birth to a daughter, and her the jealous wife also persuaded the king to throw away. It took a longer time to persuade him, but at last he agreed, and threw his daughter into the water too, and forgot Adiaha again. But the Water Ju Ju was ready again, and when he had saved the little girl, he thought the time had arrived to punish the action of the- jealous wife; so he went about amongst the head young men and persuaded them to hold a wrestling match in the market-place every week. This was done, and the Water Ju Ju told the king's son, who had become very strong, and was very like to his father in appearance, that he should go and wrestle, and that no one would be able to stand up before him. It was then arranged that there should be a grand wrestling match, to which all the strongest men in the country were invited, and the king promised to attend with his head wife.
On the day of the match the Water Ju Ju told the king's son that he need not be in the least afraid, and that his Ju Ju was so powerful, that even the strongest and best wrestlers in the country would not be able to stand up against him for even a few minutes. All the people of the country came to see the great contest, to the winner of which the king had promised to present prizes of cloth and money, and all the strongest men came. When they saw the king's son, whom nobody knew, they laughed and said, "Who is this small boy? He can have no chance against us." But when they came to wrestle, they very soon found that they were no match for him. The boy was very strong indeed, beautifully made and good to look upon, and all the people were surprised to see how like he was to the king.
After wrestling for the greater part of the day the king's son was declared the winner, having thrown every one who had stood up against him; in fact, some of his opponents had been badly hurt, and had their arms or ribs broken owing to the tremendous strength of the boy. After the match was over the king presented him with cloth and money, and invited him to dine with him in the evening. The boy gladly accepted his father's invitation; and after he had had a good wash in the river, put on his cloth and went up to the palace, where he found the bead chiefs of the country and some of the king's most favoured wives. They then sat down to their meal, and the king had his own son, whom he did not know, sitting next to him. On the other side of the boy sat the jealous wife, who had been the cause of all the trouble. All through the dinner this woman did her best to make friends with the boy, with whom she had fallen violently in love on account of his beautiful appearance, his strength, and his being the best wrestler in the country. The woman thought to herself, It I will have this boy as my husband, as my husband is now an old man and will surely soon die." The boy, however, who was as wise as he was strong, was quite aware of everything the jealous woman had done, and although he pretended to be very flattered at the advances of the king's head wife, he did not respond very readily, and went home as soon as he could.
When he returned to the Water Ju Ju's house he told him everything that had happened, and the Water Ju Ju said--
"As you are now in high favour with the king, you must go to him to-morrow and beg a favour from him. The favour you will ask is that all the country shall be called together, and that a certain case shall be tried, and that when the case is finished, the man or woman who is found to be in the wrong shall be killed by the Egbos before all the people."
So the following morning the boy went to the king, who readily granted his request, and at once sent all round the country appointing a day for all the people to come in and hear the case tried. Then the boy went back to the Water Ju Ju, who told him to go to his mother and tell her who he was, and that when the day of the trial arrived, she was to take off her ugly skin and appear in all her beauty, for the time had come when she need no longer wear it. This the son did.
When the day of trial arrived, Adiaha sat in a corner of the square, and nobody recognised the beautiful stranger as the spider's daughter. Her son then sat down next to her, and brought his sister with him. Immediately his mother saw her she said-
"This must be my daughter, whom I have long mourned as dead," and embraced her most affectionately.
The king and his head wife then arrived and sat on their stones in the middle of the square, all the people saluting them with the usual greetings. The king then addressed the people, and said that he had called them together to hear a strong palaver at the request of the young man who had been the victor of the wrestling, and who had promised that if the case went against him he would offer up his life to the Egbo. The king also said that if, on the other hand, the case was decided in the boy's favour, then the other party would be killed, even though it were himself or one of his wives; whoever it was would have to take his or her place on the killing-stone and have their heads cut off by the Egbos. To this all the people agreed, and said they would like to hear what the young man had to say. The young man then walked round the square, and bowed to the king and the people, and asked the question, "Am I not worthy to be the son of any chief in the country?" And all the people answered "Yes!"
The boy then brought his sister out into the middle, leading her by the hand. She was a beautiful girl and well made. When every one had looked at her he said, "Is not my sister worthy to be any chief's daughter?" And the people replied that she was worthy of being any one's daughter, even the king's. Then he called his mother Adiaha, and she came out, looking very beautiful with her best cloth and beads on, and all the people cheered, as they had never seen a finer woman. The boy then asked them, "Is this woman worthy of being the king's wife?" And a shout went up from every one present that she would be a proper wife for the king, and looked as if she would be the mother of plenty of fine healthy sons.
Then the boy pointed out the jealous woman who was sitting next to the king, and told the people his story, how that his mother, who had two skins, was the spider's daughter; how she had married the king, and how the head wife was jealous and had made a bad Ju Ju for the king, which made him forget his wife; how she had persuaded the king to throw himself and his sister into the river, which, as they all knew, had been done, but the Water Ju Ju had saved both of them, and had brought them up.
Then the boy said--"I leave the king and all of you people to judge my case. If I have done wrong, let me be killed on the stone by the Egbos; if, on the other hand, the woman has done evil, then let the Egbos deal with her as you may decide."
When the king knew that the wrestler was his son he was very glad, and told the Egbos to take the jealous woman away, and punish her in accordance with their laws. The Egbos decided that the woman was a witch; so they took her into the forest and tied her up to a stake, and gave her two hundred lashes with a whip made from hippopotamus hide, and then burnt her alive, so that she should not make any more trouble, and her ashes were thrown into the river. The king then embraced his wife and daughter, and told all the people that she, Adiaha, was his proper wife, and would be the queen for the future.
When the palaver was over, Adiaha was. dressed in fine clothes and beads, and carried back in state to the palace by the king's servants.
That night the king gave a big feast to all his subjects, and told them how glad he was to get back his beautiful wife whom he had never known properly before, also his son who was stronger than all men, and his fine daughter. The feast continued for a hundred and sixty-six days; and the king made a law that if any woman was found out getting medicine against her husband, she should be killed at once. Then the king built three new compounds, and placed many slaves in them, both men and women. One compound he gave to his wife, another to his son, and the third he gave to his daughter. They all lived together quite happily for some years until the king died, when his son came to the throne and ruled in his stead.

Efriam Duke was an ancient king of Calabar. He was a peaceful man, and did not like war. He had a wonderful drum, the property of which, when it was beaten, was always to provide plenty of good food and drink. So whenever any country declared war against him, he used to call all his enemies together and beat his drum; then to the surprise of every one, instead of fighting the people found tables spread with all sorts of dishes, fish, foo-foo, palm-oil chop, soup, cooked yams and ocros, and plenty of palm wine for everybody. In this way he kept all the country quiet and sent his enemies away with full stomachs, and in a happy and contented frame of mind. There was only one drawback to possessing the drum, and that was, if the owner of the drum walked over any stick on the road or stept over a fallen tree, all the food would immediately go bad, and three hundred Egbo men would appear with sticks and whips and beat the owner of the drum and all the invited guests very severely.
Efriam Duke was a rich man. He had many farms and hundreds of slaves, a large store of kernels on the beach, and many puncheons of palm-oil. He also had fifty wives and many children. The wives were all fine women and healthy; they were also good mothers, and all of them had plenty of children, which was good for the king's house.
Every few months the king used to issue invitations to all his subjects to come to a big feast, even the wild animals were invited; the elephants, hippopotami, leopards, bush cows, and antelopes used to come, for in those days there was no trouble, as they were friendly with man, and when they were at the feast they did not kill one another. All the people and the animals as well were envious of the king's drum and wanted to possess it, but the king would not part with it.
One morning lkwor Edem, one of the king's wives, took her little daughter down to the spring to wash her, as she was covered with yaws, which are bad sores all over the body. The tortoise happened to be up a palm tree, just over the spring, cutting nuts for his midday meal; and while he was cutting, one of the nuts fell to the ground, just in front of the child. The little girl, seeing the good food, cried for it, and the mother, not knowing any better, picked up the palm nut and gave it to her daughter. Directly the tortoise saw this he climbed down the tree, and asked the woman where his palm nut was. She replied that she had given it to her child to eat.
Then the tortoise, who very much wanted the king's drum, thought he would make plenty palaver over this and force the king to give him the drum, so he said to the mother of the child--
"I am a poor man, and I climbed the tree to get food for myself and my family. Then you took my palm nut and gave it to your child. I shall tell the whole matter to the king, and see what he has to say when he hears that one of his wives has stolen my food," for this, as every one knows, is a very serious crime according to native custom.
Ikwor Edem then said to the tortoise--
"I saw your palm nut lying on the ground, and thinking it had fallen from the tree, I gave it to my little girl to eat, but I did not steal it. My husband the king is a rich man, and if you have any complaint to make against me or my child, I will take you before him."
So when she had finished washing her daughter at the spring she took the tortoise to her husband, and told him what had taken place. The king then asked the tortoise what he would accept as compensation for the loss of his palm nut, and offered him money, cloth, kernels or palm-oil, all of which things the tortoise refused one after the other.
The king then said to the tortoise, "What will you take? You may have anything you like."
And the tortoise immediately pointed to the king's drum, and said that it was the only thing he wanted.
In order to get rid of the tortoise the king said, "Very well, take the drum," but he never told the tortoise about the bad things that would happen to him if he stept over a fallen tree, or walked over a stick on the road.
The tortoise was very glad at this, and carried the drum home in triumph to his wife, and said, "I am now a rich man, and shall do no more work. Whenever I want food, all I have to do is to beat this drum, and food will immediately be brought to me, and plenty to drink."
His wife and children were very pleased when they heard this, and asked the tortoise to get food at once, as they were all hungry. This the tortoise was only too pleased to do, as he wished to show off his newly acquired wealth, and was also rather hungry himself, so he beat the drum in the same way as he had seen the king do when he wanted something to eat, and immediately plenty of food appeared, so they all sat down and made a great f east. The tortoise did this for three days, and everything went well; all his children got fat, and had as much as they could possibly eat. He was therefore very proud of his drum, and in order to display his riches he sent invitations to the king and all the people and animals to come to a feast. When the people received their invitations they laughed, as they knew the tortoise was very poor, so very few attended the feast; but the king, knowing about the drum, came, and when the tortoise beat the drum, the food was brought as usual in great profusion, and all the people sat down and enjoyed their meal very much. They were much astonished that the poor tortoise should be able to entertain so many people, and told all their friends what fine dishes had been placed before them, and that they had never had a better dinner. The people who had not gone were very sorry when they heard this, as a good feast, at somebody else's expense, is not provided every day. After the feast all the people looked upon the tortoise as one of the richest men in the kingdom, and he was very much respected in consequence. No one, except the king, could understand how the poor tortoise could suddenly entertain so lavishly, but they all made up their minds that if the tortoise ever gave another feast, they would not refuse again.
When the tortoise had been in possession of the drum for a few weeks he became lazy and did no work, but went about the country boasting of his riches, and took to drinking too much. One day after he had been drinking a lot of palm wine at a distant farm, he started home carrying his drum; but having had too much to drink, he did not notice a stick in the path. He walked over the stick, and of course the Ju Ju was broken at once. But he did not know this, as nothing happened at the time, and eventually he arrived at his house very tired, and still not very well from having drunk too much. He threw the drum into a corner and went to sleep. When he woke up in the morning the tortoise began to feel hungry, and as his wife and children were calling out for food, he beat the drum; but instead of food being brought, the house was filled with Egbo men, who beat the tortoise, his wife and children, badly. At this the tortoise was very angry, and said to himself-
"I asked every one to a feast, but only a few came, and they had plenty to eat and drink. Now, when I want food for myself and my family, the Egbos come and beat me. Well, I will let the other people share the same fate, as I do not see why I and my family should be beaten when I have given a feast to all people."
He therefore at once sent out invitations to all the men and animals to come to a big dinner the next day at three o'clock in the afternoon.
When the time arrived many people came, as they did not wish to lose the chance of a free meal a second time. Even the sick men, the lame, and the blind got their friends to lead them to the feast. When they had all arrived, with the exception of the king and his wives, who sent excuses, the tortoise beat his drum as usual, and then quickly hid himself under a bench, where he could not be seen. His wife and children he had sent away before the feast, as he knew what would surely happen. Directly he had beaten the drum three hundred Egbo men appeared with whips, and started flogging all the guests, who could not escape, as the doors had been fastened. The beating went on for two hours, and the people were so badly punished, that many of them had to be carried home on the backs of their friends. The leopard was the only one who escaped, as directly he saw the Egbo men arrive he knew that things were likely to be unpleasant, so he gave a big spring and jumped right out of the compound.
When the tortoise was satisfied with the beating the people had received he crept to the door and opened it. The people then ran away, and when the tortoise gave a certain tap on the drum all the Egbo men vanished. The people who had been beaten were so angry, and made so much palaver with the tortoise, that he made up his mind to return the drum to the king the next day. So in the morning the tortoise went to the king and brought the drum with him. He told the king that he was not satisfied with the drum, and wished to exchange it for something else; he did not mind so much what the king gave him so long as he got full value for the drum, and he was quite willing to accept a certain number of slaves, or a few farms, or their equivalent in cloth or rods.
The king, however, refused to do this; but as he was rather sorry for the tortoise, he said he would present him with a magic foo-foo tree, which would provide the tortoise and his family with food, provided he kept a certain condition. This the tortoise gladly consented to do. Now this foo-foo tree only bore fruit once a year, but every day it dropped foo-foo and soup on the ground. And the condition was, that the owner should gather sufficient food for the day, once, and not return again for more. The tortoise, when he had thanked the king for his generosity, went home to his wife and told her to bring her calabashes to the tree. She did so, and they gathered plenty of foo-foo and soup quite sufficient for the whole family for that day, and went back to their house very happy.
That night they all feasted and enjoyed themselves. But one of the sons, who was very greedy, thought to himself--
"I wonder where my father gets all this good food from? I must ask him."
So in the morning he said to his father--
"Tell me where do you get all this foo-foo and soup from?"
But his father refused to tell him, as his wife, who was a cunning woman, said-
"If we let our children know the secret of the foo-foo tree, some day when they are hungry, after we have got our daily supply, one of them may go to the tree and gather more, which will break the Ju Ju."
But the envious son, being determined to get plenty of food for himself, decided to track his father to the place where he obtained the food. This was rather difficult to do, as the tortoise always went out alone, and took the greatest care to prevent any one following him. The boy, however, soon thought of a plan, and got a calabash with a long neck and a hole in the end. He filled the calabash with wood ashes, which he obtained from the fire, and then got a bag which his father always carried on his back when he went out to get food. In the bottom of the bag the boy then made a small hole, and inserted the calabash with the neck downwards, so that when his father walked to the foo-foo tree he would leave a small trail of wood ashes behind him. Then when his father, having slung his bag over his back as usual, set out to get the daily supply of food, his greedy son followed the trail of the wood ashes, taking great care to hide himself and not to let his father perceive that he was being followed. At last the tortoise arrived at the tree, and placed his calabashes on the ground and collected the food for the day, the boy watching him from a distance. When his father had finished and went home the boy also returned, and having had a good meal, said nothing to his parents, but went to bed. The next morning he got some of his brothers, and after his father had finished getting the daily supply, they went to the tree and collected much foo-foo and soup, and so broke the Ju Ju.
At daylight the tortoise went to the tree as usual, but he could not find it, as during the night the whole bush had grown up, and the foo-foo tree was hidden from sight. There was nothing to be seen but a dense mass of prickly tie-tie palm. Then the tortoise at once knew that some one had broken the Ju Ju, and had gathered foo-foo from the tree twice in the same day; so he returned very sadly to his house, and told his wife. He then called all his family together and told them what had happened, and asked them who had done this evil thing. They all denied having had anything to do with the tree, so the tortoise in despair brought all his family to the place where the foo-foo tree had been, but which was now all prickly tie-tie palm, and said-
"My dear wife and children, I have done all that I can for you, but you have broken my Ju Ju; you must therefore for the future live on the tie-tie palm."
So they made their home underneath the prickly tree, and from that day you will always find tortoises living under the prickly tie-tie palm, as they have nowhere else to go to for food.

Ituen was a young man of Calabar. He was the only child of his parents, and they were extremely fond of him, as he was of fine proportions and very good to look upon. They were poor people, and when Ituen grew up and became a man, he had very little money indeed, in fact he had so little food, that every day it was his custom to go to the market carrying an empty bag, into which he used to put anything eatable he could find after the market was over.
At this time Offiong was king. He was an old man, but he had plenty of wives. One of these women, named Attem, was quite young and very good-looking. She did not like her old husband, but wished for a young and handsome husband. She therefore told her servant to go round the town and the market to try and find such a man and to bring him at night by the side door to her house, and she herself would let him in, and would take care that her husband did not discover him.
That day the servant went all round the town, but failed to find any young man good-looking enough. She was just returning to report her ill-success when, on passing through the market-place, she saw Ituen picking up the remains of corn and other things which had been left on the ground. She was immediately struck with his fine appearance and strength, and saw that he was just the man to make a proper lover for her mistress, so she went up to him, and said that the queen had sent for him, as she was so taken with his good looks. At first Ituen was frightened and refused to go, as he knew that if the king discovered him he would be killed. However, after much persuasion he consented, and agreed to go to the queen's side door when it was dark.
When the night came he went with great fear and trembling, and knocked very softly at the queen's door. The door was opened at once by the queen herself, who was dressed in all her best clothes, and had many necklaces, beads, and anklets on. Directly she saw Ituen she fell in love with him at once, and praised his good looks and his shapely limbs. She then told her servant to bring water and clothes, and after he had had a good wash and put on a clean cloth, he rejoined the queen. She hid him in her house all the night.
In the morning when he wished to go she would not let him, but, although it was very dangerous, she hid him in the house, and secretly conveyed food and clothes to him. Ituen stayed there for two weeks, and then he said that it was time for him to go and see his mother; but the queen persuaded him to stay another week, much against his will.
When the time came for him to depart the queen got together fifty carriers with presents for Ituen's mother, who, she knew, was a poor woman. Ten slaves carried three hundred rods; the other forty carried yams, pepper, salt, tobacco, and cloth. When all the presents arrived Ituen's mother was very pleased and embraced her son, and noticed with pleasure that he was looking well, and was dressed in much finer clothes than usual; but when she heard that he had attracted the queen's attention she was frightened, as she knew the penalty imposed on any one who attracted the attention of one of the king's wives.
Ituen stayed for a. month in his parents' house and worked on the farm; but the queen could not be without her lover any longer, so she sent for him to go to her at once. Ituen went again, and, as before, arrived at night, when the queen was delighted to see him again.
In the middle of the night some of the king's servants, who had been told the story by the slaves who had carried the presents to Ituen's mother, came into the queen's room and surprised her there with Ituen. They hastened to the king, and told him what they had seen. Ituen was then made a prisoner, and the king sent out to all his people to attend at the palaver house to hear the case tried. He also ordered eight Egbos to attend armed with matchets. When the case was tried Ituen was found guilty, and the king told the eight Egbo men to take him into the bush and deal with him according to native custom. The Egbos then took Ituen into the bush and tied him up to a tree; then with a sharp knife they cut off his lower jaw, and carried it to the king.
When the queen heard the fate of her lover she was very sad, and cried for three days. This made the king angry, so he told the Egbos to deal with his wife and her servant according to their law. They took the queen and the servant into the bush, where Ituen was still tied up to the tree dying and in great pain. Then, as the queen had nothing to say in her defence, they tied her and the girl up to different trees, and cut the queen's lower jaw off in the same way as they had her lover's. The Egbos then put out both the eyes of the servant, and left all three to die of starvation. The king then made an Egbo law that for the future no one belonging to Ituen's family was to go into the market on market day, and that no one was to pick up the rubbish in the market. The king made an exception to the law in favour of the vulture and the dog, who were not considered very fine people, and would not be likely to run off with one of the king's wives, and that is why you still find vultures and dogs doing scavenger in the market-places even at the present time.

Mbotu was a very famous king of Old Town, Calabar. He was frequently at war, and was always successful, as he was a most skilful leader. All the prisoners he took were made slaves. He therefore became very rich, but, on the other hand, he had many enemies. The people of Itu in particular were very angry with him and wanted to kill him, but they were not strong enough to beat Mbotu in a pitched battle, so they had to resort to 'craft. The Itu people had an old woman who was a witch and could turn herself into whatever she pleased, and when she offered to kill Mbotu, the people were very glad, and promised her plenty of money and cloth if she succeeded in ridding them of their worst enemy. The witch then turned herself into a young and pretty girl, and having armed herself with a very sharp knife, which she concealed in her bosom, she went to Old Town, Calabar, to seek the king.
It happened that when she arrived there was a big play being held in the town, and all the people from the surrounding country had come in to dance and feast. Oyaikan, the witch, went to the play, and walked about so that every one could see her. Directly she appeared the people all marvelled at her beauty, and said that she was as beautiful as the setting sun when all the sky was red. Word was quickly brought to King Mbotu, who, it was well known, was fond of pretty girls, and he sent for her at once, all the people agreeing that she was quite worthy of being the king's wife. When she appeared before him he fancied her so much, that he told her he would marry her that very day. Oyaikan was very pleased at this, as she had never expected to get her opportunity so quickly. She therefore prepared a dainty meal for the king, into which she placed a strong medicine to make the king sleep, and then went down to the river to wash.
When she had finished it was getting dark, so she went to the king's compound, carrying her dish on her head, and was at once shown in to the king, who embraced her affectionately. She then offered him the food, which she said, quite truly, she had prepared with her own hands. The king ate the whole dish, and immediately began to feel very sleepy, as the medicine was strong and took effect quickly.
They retired to the king's chamber, and the king went to sleep at once. About midnight, when all the town was quiet, Oyaikan drew her knife from her bosom and cut the king's head off. She put the head in a bag and went out very softly, shutting and barring the door behind her. Then she walked through the town without any one observing her, and went straight to Itu, where she placed King Mbotu's head before her own king.
When the people heard that the witch had been successful and that their enemy was dead, there was great rejoicing, and the king of Itu at once made up his mind to attack Old Town, Calabar. He therefore got his fighting men together and took them in canoes by the creeks to Old Town, taking care that no one carried word to Calabar that he was coming.
The morning following the murder of Mbotu his people were rather surprised that he did not appear at his usual time, so his head wife knocked at his door. Not receiving any answer she called the household together, and they broke open the door. When they entered the room they found the king lying dead on his bed covered in blood, but his head was missing. At this a great shout went up, and the whole town mourned. Although they missed the pretty stranger, they never connected her in their minds with the death of their king, and were quite unsuspicious of any danger, and were unprepared for fighting. In the middle of the mourning, while they were all dancing, crying, and drinking palm wine, the king of Itu with all his soldiers attacked Old Town, taking them quite by surprise, and as their leader was dead, the Calabar people were very soon defeated, and many killed and taken prisoners.

A bush rat called Oyot was a great friend of Emiong, the bat; they always fed together, but the bat was jealous of the bush rat. When the bat cooked the food it was always very good, and the bush rat said, "How is it that when you make the soup it is so tasty?"
The bat replied, "I always boil myself in the water, and my flesh is so sweet, that the soup is good."
He then told the bush rat that he would show him how it was done; so he got a pot of warm water, which he told the bush rat was boiling water, and jumped into it, and very shortly afterwards came out again. When the soup was brought it was as strong and good as usual, as the bat had prepared it beforehand.
The bush rat then went home and told his wife that he was going to make good soup like the bat's. He therefore told her to boil some water, which she did. Then, when his wife was not looking, he jumped into the pot, and was very soon dead.
When his wife looked into the pot and saw the dead body of her husband boiling she was very angry, and reported the matter to the king, who gave orders that the bat should be made a prisoner. Every one turned out to catch the bat, but as he expected trouble he flew away into the bush and hid himself. All day long the people tried to catch him, so he had to change his habits, and only came out to feed when it was dark, and that is why you never see a bat in the daytime.

Effiong Edem was a native of Cobham Town. He had a very fine daughter, whose name was Afiong. All the young men in the country wanted to marry her on account of her beauty; but she refused all offers of marriage in spite of repeated entreaties from her parents, as she was very vain, and said she would only marry the best-looking man in the country, who would have to be young and strong, and capable of loving her properly. Most of the men her parents wanted her to marry, although they were rich, were old men and ugly, so the girl continued to disobey her parents, at which they were very much grieved. The skull who lived in the spirit land heard of the beauty of this Calabar virgin, and thought he would like to possess her; so he went about amongst his friends and borrowed different parts of the body from them, all of the best. From one he got a good head, another lent him a body, a third gave him strong arms, and a fourth lent him a fine pair of legs. At last he was complete, and was a very perfect specimen of manhood.
He then left the spirit land and went to Cobham market, where he saw Afiong, and admired her very much.
About this time Afiong heard that a very fine man had been seen in the market, who was better-looking than any of the natives. She therefore went to the market at once, and directly she saw the Skull in his borrowed beauty, she fell in love with him, and invited him to her house. The Skull was delighted, and went home with her, and on his arrival was introduced by the girl to her parents, and immediately asked their consent to marry their daughter. At first they refused, as they did not wish her to marry a stranger, but at last they agreed.
He lived with Afiong for two days in her parents' house, and then said he wished to take his wife back to his country, which was far off. To this the girl readily agreed, as he was such a fine man, but her parents tried to persuade her not to go. However, being very headstrong, she made up her mind to go, and they started off together. After they had been gone a few days the father consulted his Ju Ju man, who by casting lots very soon discovered that his daughter's husband belonged to the spirit land, and that she would surely be killed. They therefore all mourned her as dead.
After walking for several days, Afiong and the Skull crossed the border between the spirit land and the human country. Directly they set foot in the spirit land, first of all one man came to the Skull and demanded his legs, then another his head, and the next his body, and so on, until in a few minutes the skull was left by itself in all its natural ugliness. At this the girl was very frightened, and wanted to return home, but the skull would not allow this, and ordered her to go with him. When they arrived at the skull's house they found his mother, who was a very old woman quite incapable of doing any work, who could only creep about. Afiong tried her best to help her, and cooked her food, and brought water and firewood for the old woman. The old creature was very grateful for these attentions, and soon became quite fond of Afiong.
One day the old woman told Afiong that she was very sorry for her, but all the people in the spirit land were cannibals, and when they heard there was a human being in their country, they would come down and kill her and eat her. The skull's mother then hid Afiong, and as she had looked after her so well, she promised she would send her back to her country as soon as possible, providing that she promised for the future to obey her parents. This Afiong readily consented to do. Then the old woman sent for the spider, who was a very clever hairdresser, and made him dress Afiong's hair in the latest fashion. She also presented her with anklets and other things on account of her kindness. She then made a Ju Ju and called the winds to come and convey Afiong to her home. At first a violent tornado came, with thunder, lightning and rain, but the skull's mother sent him away as unsuitable. The next wind to come was a gentle breeze, so she told the breeze to carry Afiong to her mother's house, and said good-bye to her. Very soon afterwards the breeze deposited Afiong outside her home, and left her there.
When the parents saw their daughter they were very glad, as they had for some months given her up as lost. The father spread soft animals' skins on the ground from where his daughter was standing all the way to the house, so that her feet should not be soiled. Afiong then walked to the house and her father called all the young girls who belonged to Afiong's company to come and dance, and the feasting and dancing was kept up for eight days and nights. When the rejoicing was over, the father reported what had happened to the head chief of the town. The chief then passed a law that parents should never allow their daughters to marry strangers who came from a far country. Then the father told his daughter to marry a friend of his, and she willingly consented, and lived with him for many years, and had many children.

King Effiom of Duke Town, Calabar, was very fond of pretty maidens, and whenever he heard of a girl who was unusually good-looking, he always sent for her, and if she took his fancy, he made her one of his wives. This he could afford to do, as he was a rich man, and could pay any dowry which the parents asked, most of his money having been made by buying and selling slaves.
Effiom had two hundred and fifty wives, but he was never content, and wanted to have all the finest women in the land. Some of the king's friends, who were always on the look-out for pretty girls, told Effiom that the Cock's daughter was a lovely virgin, and far superior to any of the king's wives. Directly the king heard this he sent for the Cock, and said he intended to have his daughter as one of his wives. The Cock, being a poor man, could not resist the order of the king, so he brought his daughter, who was very good-looking and pleased the king immensely. When the king had paid the Cock a dowry of six puncheons of palm-oil, the Cock told Effiom that if he married his daughter he must not forget that she had the natural instincts of a hen, and that he should not blame Adia unen (his daughter) if she picked up corn whenever she saw it. The king replied that he did not mind what she ate so long as he possessed her.
The king then took Adia unen as his wife, and liked her so much, that he neglected all his other wives, and lived entirely with Adia unen, as she suited him exactly and pleased him more than any of his other wives. She also amused the king, and played with him and enticed him in so many different ways that he could not live without her, and always had her with him to the exclusion of his former favourites, whom he would not even speak to or notice in any way when he met them This so enraged the neglected wives that they met together, and although they all hated one another, they agreed so far that they hated the Cock's daughter more than any one, as now that she had come to the king none of them ever had a chance with him. Formerly the king, although he always had his favourites, used to favour different girls with his attentions when they pleased him particularly. That was very different in their opinion to being excluded from his presence and all his affections being concentrated on one girl, who received all his love and embraces. In consequence of this they were very angry, and determined if possible to disgrace Adia unen. After much discussion, one of the wives, who was the last favourite, and whom the arrival of the Cock's daughter had displaced, said: "This girl, whom we all hate, is, after all, only a Cock's daughter, and we can easily disgrace her in the king's eyes, as I heard her father tell the king that she could not resist corn, no matter how it was thrown about."
Very shortly after the king's wives had determined to try and disgrace Adia unen, all the people of the country came to pay homage to the king. This was done three times a year, the people bringing yams, fowls, goats, and new corn as presents, and the king entertained them with a feast of foo-foo, palm-oil chop, and tombo. A big dance was also held, which was usually kept up for several days and nights. Early in the morning the king's head wife told her servant to wash one head of corn, and when all the people were present she was to bring it in a calabash and throw it on the ground and then walk away. The corn was to be thrown in front of Aida unen, so that all the people and chiefs could see.
About ten o'clock, when all the chiefs and people had assembled, and the king had taken his seat on his big wooden chair, the servant girl came and threw the corn on the ground as she had been ordered. Directly she had done this Adia unen started towards the corn, picked it up, and began to eat. At this all the people laughed, and the king was very angry and ashamed. The king's wives and many people said that they thought the king's finest wife would have learnt better manners than to pick up corn which had been thrown away as refuse. Others said: "What can you expect from a Cock's daughter? She should not be blamed for obeying her natural instincts." But the king was so vexed, that he told one of his servants to pack up Adia unen's things and take them to her father's house. And this was done, and Aida unen returned to her parents.
That night the king's third wife, who was a friend of Adia unen's, talked the whole matter over with the king, and explained to him that it was entirely owing to the jealousy of his head wife that Adia unen had been disgraced. She also told him that the whole thing had been arranged beforehand in order that the king should get rid of Adia unen, of whom all the other wives were jealous. When the king heard this he was very angry, and made up his mind to send the jealous woman back to her parents empty-handed, without her clothes and presents. When she arrived at her father's house the parents refused to take her in, as she had been given as a wife to the king, and whenever the parents wanted anything, they could always get it at the palace. It was therefore a great loss to them. She was thus turned into the streets, and walked about very miserable, and after a time died, very poor and starving.
The king grieved so much at having been compelled to send his favourite wife Adia unen away, that he died the following year. And when the people saw that their king had died of a broken heart, they passed a law that for the future no one should marry any bird or animal.

Okun Archibong was one of King Archibong's slaves, and lived on a farm near Calabar. He was a hunter, and used to kill bush buck and other kinds of antelopes and many monkeys. The skins he used to dry in the sun , and when they were properly cured, he used to sell them in the market; the monkey skins were used for making drums, and the antelope skins were used for sitting mats. The flesh, after it had been well smoked over a wood fire, he also sold, but he did not make much money.
Okun Archibong married a slave woman of Duke's house named Nkoyo. He paid a small dowry to the Dukes, took his wife home to his farm, and in the dry season time she had a son. About four months after the birth of the child Nkoyo took him to the farm while her husband was absent hunting. She placed the little boy under a shady tree and went about her work, which was clearing the ground for the yams which would be planted about two months before the rains. Every day while the mother was working a big ape used to come from the forest and play with the little boy; he used to hold him in his arms and carry him up a tree, and when Nkoyo had finished her work, he used to bring the baby back to her. There was a hunter named Edem Effiong who had for a long time been in love with Nkoyo, and had made advances to her, but she would have nothing to do with him, as she was very fond of her husband. When she had her little child Effiong Edem was very jealous, and meeting her one day on the farm without her baby, he said: "Where is your baby?" And she replied that a big ape had taken it up a tree and was looking after it for her. When Effiong Edem saw that the ape was a big one, he made up his mind to tell Nkoyo's husband. The very next day he told Okun Archibong that he had seen his wife in the forest with a big ape. At first Okun would not believe this, but the hunter told him to come with him and he could see it with his own eyes. Okun Archibong therefore made up his mind to kill the ape. The next day he went with the other hunter to the farm and saw the ape up a tree playing with his son, so he took very careful aim and shot the ape, but it was not quite killed. It was so angry, and its strength was so great, that it tore the child limb from limb and threw it to the ground.
This so enraged Okun Archibong that seeing his wife standing near he shot her also. He then ran home and told King Archibong what had taken place. This king was very brave and fond of fighting, so as he knew that King Duke would be certain to make war upon him, he immediately called in all his fighting men. When he was quite prepared he sent a messenger to tell King Duke what had happened. Duke was very angry, and sent the messenger back to King Archibong to say that he must send the hunter to him, so that he could kill him in any way he pleased. This Archibong refused to do, and said he would rather fight. Duke then got his men together, and both sides met and fought in the market square. Thirty men were killed of Duke's men, and twenty were killed on Archibong's side; there were also many wounded. On the whole King Archibong had the best of the fighting, and drove King Duke back. When the fighting was at its hottest the other chiefs sent out all the Egbo men with drums and stopped the fight, and the next day the palaver was tried in Egbo house. King Archibong was found guilty, and was ordered to pay six thousand rods to King Duke. He refused to pay this amount to Duke , and said he would rather go on fighting, but he did not mind paying the six thousand rods to the town, as the Egbos had decided the case. They were about to commence fighting again when the whole country rose up and said they would not have any more fighting, as Archibong said to Duke that the woman's death was not really the fault of his slave Okun Archibong, but of Effiong Edem, who made the false report. When Duke heard this he agreed to leave the whole matter to the chiefs to decide, and Effiong Edem was called to take his place on the stone. He was tried and found guilty, and two Egbos came out armed with cutting whips and gave him two hundred lashes on his bare back, and then cut off his head and sent it to Duke, who placed it before his Ju Ju. From that time to the present all apes and monkeys have been frightened of human beings; and even of little children. The Egbos also passed a law that a chief should not allow one of his men slaves to marry a woman slave of another house, as it would probably lead to fighting.

Many years ago, when King Eyo was ruler of Calabar, the fish used to live on the land; he was a great friend of the leopard, and frequently used to go to his house in the bush, where the leopard entertained him. Now the leopard had a very fine wife, with whom the fish fell in love. And after a time, whenever the leopard was absent in the bush, the fish used to go to his house and make love to the leopard's wife, until at last an old woman who lived near informed the leopard what happened whenever he went away. At first the leopard would not believe that the fish, who had been his friend for so long, would play such a low trick, but one night he came back unexpectedly, and found the fish and his wife together; at this the leopard was very angry, and was going to kill the fish, but he thought as the fish had been his friend for so long, he would not deal with him himself, but would report his behaviour to King Eyo. This he did, and the king held a big palaver, at which the leopard stated his case quite shortly, but when the fish was put upon his defence he had nothing to say, so the king addressing his subjects said, "This is a very bad case, as the fish has been the leopard's friend, and has been trusted by him, but the fish has taken advantage of his friend's absence, and has betrayed him." The king, therefore, made an order that for the future the fish should live in the water, and that if he ever came on the land he should die; he also said that all men and animals should kill and eat the fish whenever they could catch him, as a punishment for his behaviour with his friend's wife.

There was once an old mother sheep who had seven lambs, and one day the bat, who was about to make a visit to his father-in-law who lived a long day's march away, went to the old sheep and asked her to lend him one of her young lambs to carry his load for him. At first the mother sheep refused, but as the young lamb was anxious to travel and see something of the world, and begged to be allowed to go, at last she reluctantly consented. So in the morning at daylight the bat and the lamb set off together, the lamb carrying the bat's drinking-horn. When they reached half-way, the bat told the lamb to leave the horn underneath a bamboo tree. Directly he arrived at the house, he sent the lamb back to get the horn. When the lamb had gone the bat's father-in-law brought him food, and the bat ate it all, leaving nothing for the lamb. When the lamb returned, the bat said to him, "Hullo! you have arrived at last I see, but you are too late for food; it is all finished." He then sent the lamb back to the tree with the horn, and when the lamb returned again it was late, and he went supperless to bed. The next day, just before it was time for food, the bat sent the lamb off again for the drinking-horn, and when the food arrived the bat, who was very greedy, ate it all up a second time. This mean behaviour on the part of the bat went on for four days, until at last the lamb became quite thin and weak. The bat decided to return home the next day, and it was all the lamb could do to carry his load. When he got home to his mother the lamb complained bitterly of the treatment he had received from the bat, and was baa-ing all night, complaining of pains in his inside. The old mother sheep, who was very fond of her children, determined to be revenged on the bat for the cruel way he had starved her lamb; she therefore decided to consult the tortoise, who, although very poor, was considered by all people to be the wisest of all animals. When the old sheep had told the whole story to the tortoise, he considered for some time, and then told the sheep that she might leave the matter entirely to him, and he would take ample revenge on the bat for his cruel treatment of her son.
Very soon after this the bat thought he would again go and see his father-in-law, so he went to the mother sheep again and asked her for one of her sons to carry his load as before. The tortoise, who happened to be present, told the bat that he was going in that direction, and would cheerfully carry his load for him. They set out on their journey the following day, and when they arrived at the half-way halting-place the bat pursued the same tactics that he had on the previous occasion. He told the tortoise to hide his drinking-horn under the same tree as the lamb had hidden it before; this the tortoise did, but when the bat was not looking he picked up the drinking-horn again and hid it in his bag. When they arrived at the house the tortoise hung the horn up out of sight in the back yard, and then sat down in the house. just before it was time for food the bat sent the tortoise to get the drinking-horn, and the tortoise went outside into the yard, and waited until he heard that the beating of the boiled yams into foo-foo had finished; he then went into the house and gave the drinking-horn to the bat, who was so surprised and angry, that when the food was passed he refused to eat any of it, so the tortoise ate it all; this went on for four days, until at last the bat became as thin as the poor little lamb had been on the previous occasion. At last the bat could stand the pains of his inside no longer, and secretly told his mother-in-law to bring him food when the tortoise was not looking. He said, "I am now going to sleep for a little, but you can wake me up when the food is ready." The tortoise, who had been listening all the time, being hidden in a corner out of sight, waited until the bat was fast asleep, and then carried him very gently into the next room and placed him on his own bed; he then very softly and quietly took off the bat's cloth and covered him self in it, and lay down where the bat had been; very soon the bat's mother-in-law brought the food and placed it next to where the bat was supposed to be sleeping, and having pulled his cloth to wake him, went away. The tortoise then got up and ate all the food; when he had finished he carried the bat back again, and took some of the palm-oil and foo-foo and placed it inside the bat's lips while he was asleep; then the tortoise went to sleep himself. In the morning when he woke up the bat was more hungry than ever, and in a very bad temper, so he sought out his mother-in-law and started scolding her, and asked her why she had not brought his food as he had told her to do. She replied she had brought his food, and that he had eaten it; but this the bat denied, and accused the tortoise of having eaten the food. The woman then said she would call the people in and they should decide the matter; but the tortoise slipped out first and told the people that the best way to find out who had eaten the food was to make both the bat and himself rinse their mouths out with clean water into a basin. This they decided to do, so the tortoise got his tooth-stick which he always used, and having cleaned his teeth properly, washed his mouth out, and returned to the house.
When all the people had arrived the woman told them how the bat had abused her, and as he still maintained stoutly that he had had no food for five days, the people said that both he and the tortoise should wash their mouths out with clean water into two clean calabashes; this was done, and at once it could clearly be seen that the bat had been eating, as there were distinct traces of the palm-oil and foo-foo which the tortoise had put inside his lips floating on the water. When the people saw this they decided against the bat, and he was so ashamed that he ran away then and there, and has ever since always hidden himself in the bush during the daytime, so that no one could see him, and only comes out at night to get his food.
The next day the tortoise returned to the mother sheep and told her what he had done, and that the bat was for ever disgraced. The old sheep praised him very much, and told all her friends, in consequence of which the reputation of the tortoise for wisdom was greatly increased throughout the whole country.

When Eyo III. was ruling over all men and animals, he had a very big palaver house to which he used to invite his subjects at intervals to feast. After the feast had been held and plenty of tombo had been drunk, it was the custom of the people to make speeches. One day after the feast the head driver ant got up and said he and his people were stronger than any one, and that no one, not even the elephant, could stand before him, which was quite true. He was particularly offensive in his allusions to the worms (whom he disliked very much), and said they were poor wriggling things.
The worms were very angry and complained, so the king said that the best way to decide the question who was the stronger was for both sides to meet on the road and fight the matter out between themselves to a finish. He appointed the third day from the feast for the contest, and all the people turned out to witness the battle.
The driver ants left their nest in the early morning in thousands and millions, and, as is their custom, marched in a line about one inch broad densely packed, so that it was like a dark-brown band moving over the country. In front of the advancing column they had out their scouts, advance guard, and flankers, and the main body followed in their millions close behind.
When they came to the battlefield the moving band spread out, and as the thousands upon thousands of ants rolled up, the whole piece of ground was a moving mass of ants and bunches of struggling worms. The fight was over in a very few minutes, as the worms were bitten in pieces by the sharp pincer-like mouths of the driver ants. The few worms who survived squirmed away and buried themselves out of sight.
King Eyo decided that the driver ants were easy winners, and ever since the worms have always been afraid and have lived underground; and if they happen to come to the surface after the rain they hide themselves under the ground whenever anything approaches, as they fear all people.

When Ambo was king of Calabar, the elephant was not only a very big animal, but he had eyes in proportion to his immense bulk. In those days men and animals were friends, and all mixed together quite freely. At regular intervals King Ambo used to give a feast, and the elephant used to eat more than any one, although the hippopotamus used to do his best; however, not being as big as the elephant, although he was very fat, he was left a long way behind.
As the elephant ate so much at these feasts, the tortoise, who was small but very cunning, made up his mind to put a stop to the elephant eating more than a fair share of the food provided. He therefore placed some dry kernels and shrimps, of which the elephant was very fond, in his bag, and went to the elephant's house to make an afternoon call.
When the tortoise arrived the elephant told him to sit down, so he made himself comfortable, and, having shut one eye, took one palm kernel and a shrimp out of his bag, and commenced to eat them with much relish.
When the elephant saw the tortoise eating, he said, as he was always hungry himself, "You seem to have some good food there; what are you eating?"
The tortoise replied that the food was 'sweet too much," but was rather painful to him, as he was eating one of his own eyeballs; and he lifted up his head, showing one eye closed.
The elephant then said, "If the food is so good, take out one of my eyes and give me the same food."
The tortoise, who was waiting for this, knowing how greedy the elephant was, had brought a sharp knife with him for that very purpose, and said to the elephant, "I cannot reach your eye, as you are so big."
The elephant then took the tortoise up in his trunk and lifted him up. As soon as he came near the elephant's eye, with one quick scoop of the sharp knife he had the elephant's right eye out. The elephant trumpeted with pain; but the tortoise gave him some of the dried kernels and shrimps, and they so pleased the elephant's palate that he soon forgot the pain.
Very soon the elephant said, That food is so sweet, I must have some more but the tortoise told him that before he could have any the other eye must come out. To this the elephant agreed; so the tortoise quickly got his knife to work, and very soon the elephant's left eye was on the ground, thus leaving the elephant quite blind. The tortoise then slid down the elephant's trunk on to the ground and hid himself. The elephant then began to make a great noise, and started pulling trees down and doing much damage, calling out for the tortoise but of course he never answered, and the elephant could not find him.
The next morning, when the elephant heard the people passing, he asked them what the time was, and the bush buck, who was nearest, shouted out, "The sun is now up, and I am going to market to get some yams and fresh leaves for my food."
Then the elephant perceived that the tortoise had deceived him, and began to ask all the passers-by to lend him a pair of eyes, as he could not see, but every one refused, as they wanted their eyes themselves. At last the worm grovelled past, and seeing the big elephant, greeted him in his humble way. He was much surprised when the king of the forest returned his salutation, and very much flattered also.
The elephant said, " Look here, worm, I have mislaid my eyes. Will you lend me yours for a few days? I will return them next market-day."
The worm was so flattered at being noticed by the elephant that he gladly consented, and took his eyes out-which, as every one knows, were very small-and gave them to the elephant. When the elephant had put the worm's eyes into his own large eye-sockets, the flesh immediately closed round them so tightly that when the market-day arrived it was impossible for the elephant to get them out again to return to the worm; and although the worm repeatedly made applications to the elephant to return his eyes, the elephant always pretended not to hear, and sometimes used to say in a very loud voice, " If there are any worms about, they had better get out of my way, as they are so small I cannot see them, and if I tread on them they will be squashed into a nasty mess."
Ever since then the worms have been blind, and for the same reason elephants have such small eyes, quite out of proportion to the size of their huge bodies.

In the olden days there was a very fine young hen who lived with her parents in the bush.
One day a hawk was hovering round, about eleven o'clock in the morning, as was his custom, making large circles in the air and scarcely moving his wings. His keen eyes were wide open, taking in everything (for nothing moving ever escapes the eyes of a hawk, no matter how small it may be or how high up in the air the hawk may be circling). This hawk saw the pretty hen picking up some corn near her father's house. He therefore closed his wings slightly, and in a second of time was close to the ground; then spreading his wings out to check his flight, he alighted close to the hen and perched himself on the fence, as a hawk does not like to walk on the ground if he can help it.
He then greeted the young hen with his most enticing whistle, and offered to marry her. She agreed, so the hawk spoke to the parents, and paid the agreed amount of dowry, which consisted mostly of corn, and the next day took the young hen off to his home.
Shortly after this a young cock who lived near the hen's former home found out where she was living, and having been in love with her for some months-in fact, ever since his spurs had grown-determined to try and make her return to her own country. He therefore went at dawn, and, having flapped his wings once or twice, crowed in his best voice to the young hen. When she heard the sweet voice of the cock she could not resist his invitation, so she went out to him, and they walked off together to her parent's house, the young cock strutting in front crowing at intervals.
The hawk, who was hovering high up in the sky, quite out of sight of any ordinary eye, saw what had happened, and was very angry. He made up his mind at once that he would obtain justice from the king, and flew off to Calabar, where he told the whole story, and asked for immediate redress. So the king sent for the parents of the hen, and told them they must repay to the hawk the amount of dowry they had received from him on the marriage of their daughter, according to the native custom; but the hen's parents said that they were so poor that they could not possibly afford to pay. So the king told the hawk that he could kill and eat any of the cock's children whenever and wherever he found them as payment of his dowry, and, if the cock made any complaint, the king would not listen to him.
From that time until now, whenever, a hawk sees a chicken he swoops down and carries it off in part-payment of his dowry.

Many years ago the sun and water were great friends, and both lived on the earth together. The sun very often used to visit the water, but the water never returned his visits. At last the sun asked the water why it was that he never came to' see him in his house, the water replied that the sun's house was not big enough, and that if he came with his people he would drive the sun out.
He then said, "If you wish me to visit you, you must build a very large compound; but I warn you that it will have to be a tremendous place, as my people are very numerous, and take up a lot of room."
The sun promised to build a very big compound, and soon afterwards he returned home to his wife, the moon, who greeted him with a broad smile when he opened the door. The sun told the moon what he had promised the water, and the next day commenced building a huge compound in which to entertain his friend.
When it was completed, he asked the water to come and visit him the next day.
When the water arrived, he called out to the sun, and asked him whether it would be safe for- him to enter, and the sun answered, "Yes, come in, my friend."
The water then began to flow in, accompanied by the fish and all the water animals.
Very soon the water was knee-deep, so he asked the sun if it was still safe, and the sun again said, "Yes," so more water came in.
When the water was level with the top of a man's head, the water said to the sun, "Do you want more of my people to come?" and the sun and moon both answered, "Yes, not knowing any better, so the water flowed on, until the sun and moon had to perch themselves on the top of the roof.
Again the water addressed the sun, but receiving the same answer, and more of his people rushing in, the water very soon overflowed the top of the roof, and the sun and moon were forced to go up into the sky, where they have remained ever since.

When Adiaha Umo was Queen of Calabar, being very rich and hospitable, she used to give big feasts to all the domestic animals, but never invited the wild beasts, as she was afraid of them.
At one feast she gave there were three large tables, and she told the cow to sit at the head of the table, as she was the biggest animal present, and share out the food. The cow was quite ready to do this, and the first course was passed, which the cow shared out amongst the people, but forgot the fly, because he was so small.
When the fly saw this, he called out to the cow to give him his share, but the cow said: "Be quiet, my friend, you must have patience."
When the second course arrived, the fly again called out to the cow, but the cow merely pointed to her eye, and told the fly to look there, and he would get food later.
At last all the dishes were finished, and the fly, having been given no food by the cow, went supperless to bed.
The next day the fly complained to the queen, who decided that , as the cow had presided at the feast, and had not given the fly his share, but had pointed to her eye, for the future the fly could always get his food from the cow's eyes wherever she went; and even at the present time, wherever the cows are, the flies can always be seen feeding off their eyes in accordance with the queen's orders.

Ansa was King of Calabar for fifty years. He had a very faithful cat as a housekeeper, and a rat was his house-boy. The king was an obstinate, headstrong man, but was very fond of the cat, who had been in his store for many years.
The rat, who was very poor, fell in love with one of the king's servant girls, but was unable to give her any presents, as he had no money.
At last he thought of the king's store, so in the night-time, being quite small, he had little difficulty, having made a hole in the roof, in getting into the store. He then stole corn and native pears, and presented them to his sweetheart.
At the end of the month, when the cat had to render her account of the things in the store to the king, it was found that a lot of corn and native pears were missing. The king was very angry at this, and asked the cat for an explanation. But the cat-could not account for the loss, until one of her friends told her that the rat had been stealing the corn and giving it to the girl.
When the cat told the king, he called the girl before him and had her flogged. The rat he handed over to the cat to deal with, and dismissed them both from his service. The cat was so angry at this that she killed and ate the rat, and ever since that time whenever a cat sees a rat she kills and eats it.

In the olden days the thunder and lightning lived on the earth amongst all the other people, but the king made them live at the far end of the town, as far as possible from other people's houses.
The thunder was an old mother sheep, and the lightning was her son, a ram. Whenever the ram got angry he used to go about and burn houses and knock down trees; he even did damage on the farms, and sometimes killed people. Whenever the lightning did these things, his mother used to call out to him in a very loud voice to stop and not to do any more damage; but the lightning did not care in the least for what his mother said, and when he was in a bad temper used to do a very large amount of damage. At last the people could not stand it any longer, and complained to the king.
So the king made a special order that the sheep (Thunder) and her son, the ram (Lightning), should leave the town and live in the far bush. This did not do much good, as when the ram got angry he still burnt the forest, and the flames sometimes spread to the farms and consumed them.
So the people complained again, and the king banished both the lightning and the thunder from the earth and made them live in the sky, where they could not cause so much destruction. Ever since, when the lightning is angry, he commits damage as before, but you can hear his mother, the thunder, rebuking him and telling him to stop. Sometimes, however, when the mother has gone away some distance from her naughty son, you can still see that he is angry and is doing damage, but his mother's voice cannot be heard.

The bush cow and the elephant were always bad friends, and as they could not settle their disputes between themselves, they agreed to let the head chief decide.
The cause of their unfriendliness was that the elephant was always boasting about his strength to all his friends, which made the bush cow ashamed of himself, as he was always a good fighter and feared no man or animal. When the matter was referred to the head chief, he decided that the best way to settle the dispute was for the elephant and bush cow to meet and fight one another in a large open space. He decided that the fight should take place in the market-place on the next market-day, when all the country people could witness the battle.
When the market-day arrived, the bush cow went out in the early morning and took up his position some distance from the town on the main road to the market, and started bellowing and tearing up the ground. As the people passed he asked them whether they had seen anything of the "Big, Big one," which was the name of the elephant.
A bush buck, who happened to be passing, replied, I am only a small antelope, and am on my way to the market. How should I know anything of the movements of the 'Big, Big one?'" The bush cow then allowed him to pass.
After a little time the bush cow heard the elephant trumpeting, and could hear him as he came nearer breaking down trees and trampling down the small bush.
When the elephant came near the bush cow, they both charged one another, and a tremendous fight commenced, in which a lot of damage was done to the surrounding farms, and many of the people were frightened to go to the market, and returned to their houses.
At last the monkey, who had been watching the fight from a distance whilst he was jumping from branch to branch high up in the trees, thought he would report what he had seen to the head chief. Although he forgot several times what it was he wanted to do, which is a little way monkeys have, he eventually reached the chief's house, and jumped upon the roof, where he caught and ate a spider. He then climbed to the ground again, and commenced playing with a small stick. But he very soon got tired of this, and then, picking up a stone, he rubbed it backwards and forwards on the ground in an aimless sort of way, whilst looking in the opposite direction. This did not last long, and very soon he was busily engaged in a minute personal inspection.
His attention was then attracted by a large praying mantis, which had fluttered into the house, making much clatter with its wings. When it settled, it immediately assumed its usual prayerful attitude.
The monkey, after a careful stalk, seized the mantis, and having deliberately pulled the legs off one after the other, he ate the body, and sat down with his head on one side, looking very wise, but in reality thinking of nothing.
Just then the chief caught sight of him while he was scratching himself, and shouted out in a loud voice, "Ha, monkey, is that you? What do you want here?"
At the chief's voice the monkey gave a jump, and started chattering like anything. After a time he replied very nervously: "Oh yes, of course! Yes, I came to see you." Then he said to himself, "I wonder what on earth it was I came to tell the chief?" but it was no use, everything had gone out of his head.
Then the chief told the monkey he might take one of the ripe plantains hanging up in the verandah. The monkey did not want telling twice, as he was very fond of plantains. He soon tore off the skin, and holding the plantain in both hands, took bite after bite from the end of it, looking at it carefully after each bite.
Then the chief remarked that the elephant and the bush cow ought to have arrived by that time, as they were going to have a great fight. Directly the monkey heard this he remembered what it was he wanted to tell the chief; so, having swallowed the piece of plantain he had placed in the side of his cheek, he said: "Ah I that reminds me," and then, after much chattering and making all sorts of funny grimaces, finally made the chief understand that the elephant and bush cow, instead of fighting where they had been told, were having it out in the bush on the main road leading to the market, and had thus stopped most of the people coming in.
When the chief heard this he was much incensed, and called for his bow and poisoned arrows, and went to the scene of the combat. He then shot both the elephant and the bush cow, and throwing his bow and arrows away, ran and hid himself in the bush. About six hours afterwards both the elephant and bush cow died in great pain.
Ever since, when wild animals want to fight between themselves, they always fight in the big bush and not on the public roads; but as the fight was never definitely decided between the elephant and the bush cow, whenever they meet one another in the forest, even to the present time, they always fight.

Ekpo and Etim were half-brothers, that is to say they had the same mother, but different fathers. Their mother first of all had married a chief of Duke Town, when Ekpo was born; but after a time she got tired of him and went to Old Town, where she married Ejuqua and gave birth to Etim.
Both of the boys grew up and became very rich. Ekpo had a cock, of which he was very fond, and every day when Ekpo sat down to meals the cock used to fly on to the table and feed also. Ama Ukwa, a native of Old Town, who was rather poor, was jealous of the two brothers, and made up his mind if possible to bring about a quarrel between them, although he pretended to be friends with both.
One day Ekpo, the elder brother, gave a big dinner, to which Etim and many other people were invited. Ama Ukwa was also present. A very good dinner was laid for the guests, and plenty of palm wine was provided. When they had commenced to feed, the pet cock flew on to the table and began to feed off Etim's plate. Etim then told one of his servants to seize the cock and tie him up in the house until after the feast. So the servant carried the cock to Etim's house and tied him up for safety.
After much eating and drinking, Etim returned home late at night with his friend Ama Ukwa, and just before they went to bed, Ama Ukwa saw Ekpo's cock tied up. So early in the morning he went to Ekpo's house, who received him gladly.
About eight o'clock, when it was time for Ekpo to have his early morning meal, he noticed that his pet cock was missing. When he remarked upon its absence, Ama Ukwa told him that his brother had seized the cock the previous evening during the dinner, and was going to kill it, just to see what Ekpo would do. When Ekpo heard this, he was very vexed, and sent Ama Ukwa back to his brother to ask him to return the cock immediately. Instead of delivering the message as he had been instructed, Ama Ukwa told Etim that his elder brother was so angry with him for taking away his friend, the cock, that he would fight him, and had sent Ama Ukwa on purpose to declare war between the two towns.
Etim then told Ama Ukwa to return to Ekpo, and say he would be prepared for anything his brother could do. Ama Ukwa then advised Ekpo to call all his people in from their farms, as Etim would attack him, and on his return he advised Etim to do the same. He then arranged a day for the fight to take place between -the two brothers and their people. Etim then marched his men to the other side of the creek, and waited for his brother; so Ama Ukwa went to Ekpo and told him that Etim had got all his people together and was waiting to fight. Ekpo then led his men against his brother, and there was a big battle, many men being killed on both sides. The fighting went on all day, until at last, towards evening, the other chiefs of Calabar met and determined to stop it; so they called the Egbo men together and sent them out with their drums, and eventually the fight stopped.
Three days later a big palaver was held, when each of the brothers was told to state his case. When they had done so, it was found that Ama Ukwa had caused the quarrel, and the chiefs ordered that he should be killed. His father, who was a rich man, offered to give the Egbos five thousand rods, five cows, and seven slaves to redeem his son, but they decided to refuse his offer.
The next day, after being severely flogged, he was left for twenty-four hours tied up to a tree, and the following day his head was cut off.
Ekpo was then ordered to kill his pet cock, so that it should not cause any further trouble between himself and his brother, and a law was passed that for the future no one should keep a pet cock or any other tame animal.

Many years ago the hippopotamus, whose name was Isantim, was one of the biggest kings on the land; he was second only to the elephant. The hippo had seven large fat wives, of whom he was very fond. Now and then he used to give a big feast to the people, but a curious thing was that, although every one knew the hippo, no one, except his seven wives, knew his name.
At one of the feasts, just as the people were about to sit down, the hippo said, "You have come to feed at my table, but none of you know my name. If you cannot tell my name, you shall all of you go away without your dinner."
As they could not guess his name, they had to go away and leave all the good food and tombo behind them. But before they left, the tortoise stood up and asked the hippopotamus what he would do if he told him his name at the next feast? So the hippo replied that he would be so ashamed of himself, that he and his whole family would leave the land, and for the future would dwell in the water.
Now it was the custom for the hippo and his seven wives to go down every morning and evening to the river to wash and have a drink. Of this custom the tortoise was aware. The hippo used to walk first, and the seven wives followed. One day when they had gone down to the river to bathe, the tortoise made a small hole in the middle of the path, and then waited. When the hippo and his wives returned, two of the wives were some distance behind, so the tortoise came out from where he had been hiding, and half buried himself in the hole he had dug, leaving the greater part of his shell exposed. When the two hippo wives came along, the first one knocked her foot against the tortoise's shell, and immediately called out to her husband, "Oh! Isantim , my husband, I have hurt my foot." At this the tortoise was very glad, and went joyfully home, as he had found out the hippo's name.
When the next feast was given by the hippo, he made the same condition about his name; so the tortoise got up and said, "You promise you will not kill me if I tell you your name?" and the hippo promised. The tortoise then shouted as loud as he was able, "Your name is Isantim," at which a cheer went up from all the people, and then they sat down to their dinner.
When the feast was over, the hippo, with his seven wives, in accordance with his promise, went down to the river, and they have always lived in the water from that day till now; and although they come on shore to feed at night, you never find a hippo on the land in the daytime.

In the beginning of the world when the Creator had made men and women and the animals, they all lived together in the creation land. The Creator was a big chief, past all men, and being very kindhearted, was very sorry whenever any one died. So one day he sent for the dog, who was his head messenger, and told him to go out into the world and give his word to all people that for the future whenever any one died the body was to be placed in the compound, and wood ashes were to be thrown over it; that the dead body was to be left on the ground, and in twenty-four hours it would become alive again.
When the dog had travelled for half a day he began to get tired; so as he was near an old woman's house he looked in, and seeing a bone with some meat on it he made a meal off it, and then went to sleep, entirely forgetting the message which had been given him to deliver.
After a time, when the dog did not return, the Creator called for a sheep, and sent him out with the same message. But the sheep was a very foolish one, and being hungry, began eating the sweet grasses by the wayside. After a time, however, he remembered that he had a message to deliver, but forgot what it was exactly; so as he went about among the people he told them that the message the Creator had given him to tell the people, was that whenever any one died they should be buried underneath the ground.
A little time afterwards the dog remembered his message, so he ran into the town and told the people that they were to place wood ashes on the dead bodies and leave them in the compound, and that they would come to life again after twenty-four hours. But the people would not believe him, and said, "We have already received the word from the Creator by the sheep, that all dead bodies should be buried." In consequence of this the dead bodies are now always buried, and the dog is much disliked and not trusted as a messenger, as if he had not found the bone in the old woman's house and forgotten his message, the dead people might still be alive.

There was once a very fat woman who was made of oil. She was very beautiful, and many young men applied to the parents for permission to marry their daughter, and offered dowry, but the mother always refused, as she said it was impossible for her daughter to work on a farm, as she would melt in the sun. At last a stranger came from a far-distant country and fell in love with the fat woman, and he promised if her mother would hand her to him that he would keep her in the shade. At last the mother agreed, and he took his wife away.
When he arrived at his house, his other wife immediately became very jealous, because when there was work to be done, firewood to be collected, or water to be carried, the fat woman stayed at home and never helped, as she was frightened of the heat.
One day when the husband was absent, the jealous wife abused the fat woman so much that she finally agreed to go and work on the farm, although her little sister, whom she had brought from home with her, implored her not to go, reminding her that their mother had always told them ever since they were born that she would melt away if she went into the sun. All the way to the farm the fat woman managed to keep in the shade, and when they arrived at the farm the sun was very hot, so the fat woman remained in the shade of a big tree. When the jealous wife saw this she again began abusing her, and asked her why she did not do her share of the work. At last she could stand the nagging no longer, and although her little sister tried very hard to prevent her, the fat woman went out into the sun to work, and immediately began to melt away. There was very soon nothing left of her but one big toe, which had been covered by a leaf. This her little sister observed, and with tears in her eyes she picked up the toe, which was all that remained of the fat woman, and having covered it carefully with leaves, placed it in the bottom of her basket. When she arrived at the house the little sister placed the toe in an earthen pot, filled it with water, and covered the top up with clay.
When the husband returned, he said, "Where is my fat wife?" and the little sister, crying bitterly, told him that the jealous woman had made her go out into the sun, and that she had melted away. She then showed him the pot with the remains of her sister, and told him that her sister would come to life again in three months' time quite complete, but he must send away the jealous wife, so that there should be no more trouble; if he refused to do this, the little girl said she would take the pot back to their mother, and when her sister became complete again they would remain at home.
The husband then took the jealous wife back to her parents, who sold her as a slave and paid the dowry back to the husband, so that he could get another wife. When he received the money, the husband took it home and kept it until the three months had elapsed, when the little sister opened the pot and the fat woman emerged, quite as fat and beautiful as she had been before. The husband was so delighted that he gave a feast to all his friends and neighbours, and told them the whole story of the bad behaviour of his jealous wife.
Ever since that time, whenever a wife behaves very badly the husband returns her to the parents, who sell the woman as a slave, and out of the proceeds of the sale reimburse the husband the amount of dowry which he paid when he married the girl.

Many years ago there was a great famine throughout the land, and all the people were starving. The yam crop had failed entirely, the plantains did not bear any fruit, the ground-nuts were all shrivelled up, and the corn never came to a head; even the palm-oil nuts did not ripen, and the peppers and ocros also gave out.
The leopard, however, who lived entirely on "beef," did not care for any of these things; and although some of the animals who lived on corn and the growing crops began to get rather skinny, he did not mind very much. In order to save himself trouble, as everybody was complaining of the famine, he called a meeting of all the animals and told them that, as they all knew, he was very powerful and must have food, that the famine did not affect him, as he only lived on flesh, and as there were plenty of animals about he did not intend to starve. He then told all the animals present at the meeting that if they did not wish to be killed themselves they must bring their grand mothers to him for food, and when they were finished he would feed off their mothers. The animals might bring their grandmothers in succession, and he would take them in their turn; so that, as there were many different animals, it would probably be some time before their mothers were eaten, by which time it was possible that the famine would be over. But in any case, he warned them that he was determined to have sufficient food for himself, and that if the grandmothers or mothers were not forthcoming he would turn upon the young people themselves and kill and eat them.
This, of course, the young generation, who had attended the meeting, did not appreciate, and in order to save their own skins, agreed to supply the leopard with his daily meal.
The first to appear with his aged grandmother was the squirrel. The grandmother was a poor decrepit old thing, with a mangy tail, and the leopard swallowed her at one gulp, and then looked round for more. In an angry voice he growled out: "This is not the proper food for me; I must have more at once."
Then a bush cat pushed his old grandmother in front of the leopard, but he snarled at her and said, "Take the nasty old thing away; I want some sweet food."
It was then the turn of a bush buck, and after a great deal of hesitation a wretchedly poor and thin old doe tottered and fell in front of the leopard, who immediately despatched her, and although the meal was very unsatisfactory, declared that his appetite was appeased for that day.
The next day a few more animals brought their old grandmothers, until at last it became the tortoise's turn; but being very cunning, he produced witnesses to prove that his grandmother was dead, so the leopard excused him.
After a few days all the animals' grandmothers were exhausted, and it became the turn of the mothers to supply food for the ravenous leopard. Now although most of the young animals did not mind getting rid of their grandmothers, whom they had scarcely even known, many of them had very strong objections to providing their mothers, of whom they were very fond, as food for the leopard. Amongst the strongest objectors were the squirrel and the tortoise. The tortoise, who had thought the whole thing out, was aware that, as every one knew that his mother was alive (she being rather an amiable old person and friendly with all-comers), the same excuse would not avail him a second time. He therefore told his mother to climb up a palm tree, and that he would provide her with food until the famine was over. He instructed her to let down a basket every day, and said that he would place food in it for her. The tortoise made the basket for his mother, and attached it to a long string of tie-tie. The string was so strong that she could haul her son up whenever he wished to visit her.
All went well for some days, as the tortoise used to go at daylight to the bottom of the tree where his mother lived and place her food in the basket; then the old lady would pull the basket up and have her food, and the tortoise would depart on his daily round in his usual leisurely manner.
In the meantime the leopard had to have his daily food, and the squirrel's turn came first after the grandmothers had been finished, so he was forced to produce his mother for the leopard to eat, as he was a poor, weak thing and not possessed of any cunning. The squirrel was, however, very fond of his mother, and when she had been eaten he remembered that the tortoise had not produced his grandmother for the leopard's food. He therefore determined to set a watch on the movements of the tortoise.
The very next morning, while he was gathering nuts, he saw the tortoise walking very slowly through the bush, and being high up in the trees and able to travel very fast, had no difficulty in keeping the tortoise in sight without being noticed. When the tortoise arrived at the foot of the tree where his mother lived, he placed the food in the basket which his mother had let down already by the tie-tie, and having got into the basket and given a pull at the string to signify that everything was right, was hauled up, and after a time was let down again in the basket. The squirrel was watching all the time, and directly the tortoise had gone, jumped from branch to branch of the trees, and very soon arrived at the place where the leopard was snoozing.
When he woke up, the squirrel said:
"You have eaten my grandmother and my mother, but the tortoise has not provided any food for you. It is now his turn, and he has hidden his mother away in a tree."
At this the leopard was very angry, and told the squirrel to lead him at once to the tree where the tortoise's mother lived. But the squirrel said:
"The tortoise only goes at daylight, when his mother lets down a basket; so if you go in the morning early, she will pull you up, and you can then kill her."
To this the leopard agreed, and the next morning the squirrel came at cockcrow and led the leopard to the tree where the tortoise's mother was hidden. The old lady had already let down the basket for her daily supply of food, and the leopard got into it and gave the line a pull; but except a few small jerks nothing happened, as the old mother tortoise was not strong enough to pull a heavy leopard off the ground. When the leopard saw that he was not going to be pulled up, being an expert climber, he scrambled up the tree, and when he got to the top he found the poor old tortoise, whose shell was so tough that he thought she was not worth eating, so he threw her down on to the ground in a violent temper, and then came down himself and went home.
Shortly after this the tortoise arrived at the tree, and finding the basket on the ground gave his usual tug at it, but there was no answer. He then looked about, and after a little time came upon the broken shell of his poor old mother, who by this time was quite dead. The tortoise knew at once that the leopard had killed his mother, and made up his mind that for the future he would live alone and have nothing to do with the other animals.

There was once an old woman who was very poor, and lived in a small mud hut thatched with mats made from the leaves of the tombo palm in the bush. She was often very hungry, as there was no one to look after her.
In the olden days the moon used often to come down to the earth, although she lived most of the time in the sky. The moon was a fat woman with a skin of hide, and she was full of fat meat. She was quite round, and in the night used to give plenty of light. The moon was sorry for the poor starving old woman, so she came to her and said, "You may cut some of my meat away for your food." This the old woman did every evening, and the moon got smaller and smaller until you could scarcely see her at all. Of course this made her give very little light, and all the people began to grumble in consequence, and to ask why it was that the moon was getting so thin.
At last the people went to the old woman's house where there happened to be a little girl sleeping. She had been there for some little time, and had seen the moon come down every evening, and the old woman go out with her knife and carve her daily supply of meat out of the moon. As she was very frightened, she told the people all about it, so they determined to set a watch on the movements of the old woman.
That very night the moon came down as usual, and the old woman went out with her knife and basket to get her food; but before she could carve any meat all the people rushed out shouting, and the moon was so frightened that she went back again into the sky, and never came down again to the earth. The old woman was left to starve in the bush.
Ever since that time the moon has hidden herself most of the day, as she was so frightened, and she still gets very thin once a month, but later on she gets fat again, and when she is quite fat she gives plenty of light all the night; but this does not last very long, and she begins to get thinner and thinner, in the same way as she did when the old woman was carving her meat from her.

At the time of the great famine all the animals were very thin and weak from want of food; but there was one exception, and that was the tortoise and all his family, who were quite fat, and did not seem to suffer at all. Even the leopard was very thin, in spite of the arrangement he had made with the animals to bring him their old grandmothers and mothers for food.
In the early days of the famine (as you will remember) the leopard had killed the mother of the tortoise, in consequence of which the tortoise was very angry with the leopard, and determined if possible to be revenged upon him. The tortoise, who was very clever, had discovered a shallow lake full of fish in the middle of the forest, and every morning he used to go to the lake and, without much trouble, bring back enough food for himself and his family. One day the leopard met the tortoise and noticed how fat he was. As he was very thin himself he decided to watch the tortoise, so the next morning he hid himself in the long grass near the tortoise's house and waited very patiently, until at last the tortoise came along quite slowly, carrying a basket which appeared to be very heavy. Then the leopard sprang out, and said to the tortoise:
"What have you got in that basket?
The tortoise, as he did not want to lose his breakfast, replied that he was carrying firewood back to his home. Unfortunately for the tortoise the leopard had a very acute sense of smell, and knew at once that there was fish in the basket, so he said:
"I know there is fish in there, and I am going to eat it."
The tortoise, not being in a position to refuse, as he was such a poor creature, said:
"Very well. Let us sit down under this shady tree, and if you will make a fire I will go to my house and get pepper, oil, and salt, and then we will feed together."
To this the leopard agreed, and began to search about for dry wood, and started the fire. In the meantime the tortoise waddled off to his house, and very soon returned with the pepper, salt, and oil; he also brought a long piece of cane tie-tie, which is very strong. This he put on the ground, and began boiling the fish. Then he said to the leopard:
"While we are waiting for the fish to cook, let us play at tying one another up to a tree. You may tie me up first, and when I say 'Tighten,' you must loose the rope, and when I say 'Loosen,' you must tighten the rope."
The leopard, who was very hungry, thought that this game would make the time pass more quickly until the fish was cooked, so he said he would play. The tortoise then stood with his back to the tree and said, "Loosen the rope," and the leopard, in accordance with the rules of the game, began to tie up the tortoise. Very soon the tortoise shouted out, "Tighten!" and the leopard at once unfastened the tie-tie, and the tortoise was free. The tortoise then said, "Now, leopard, it is your turn; " so the leopard stood up against the tree and called out to the tortoise to loosen the rope, and the tortoise at once very quickly passed the rope several times round the leopard and got him fast to the tree. Then the leopard said, "Tighten the rope;" but instead of playing the game in accordance with the rules he bad laid down, the tortoise ran faster and faster with the rope round the leopard, taking great care, however, to keep out of reach of the leopard's claws, and very soon had the leopard so securely fastened that it was quite impossible for him to free himself.
All this time the leopard was calling out to the tortoise to let him go, as he was tired of the game; but the tortoise only laughed, and sat down at the fireside and commenced his meal. When he had finished he packed up the remainder of the fish for his family, and prepared to go, but before he started he said to the leopard:
"You killed my mother and now you want to take my fish. It is not likely that I am going to the lake to get fish for you, so I shall leave you here to starve."
He then threw the remains of the pepper and salt into the leopard's eyes and quietly went on his way, leaving the leopard roaring with pain.
All that day and throughout the night the leopard was calling out for some one to release him, and vowing all sorts of vengeance on the tortoise; but no one came, as the people and animals of the forest do not like to hear the leopard's voice.
In the morning, when the animals began to go about to get their food, the leopard called out to every one he saw to come and untie him, but they all refused, as they knew that if they did so the leopard would most likely kill them at once and eat them. At last a bush rat came near and saw the leopard tied up to the tree and asked him what was the matter, so the leopard told him that he had been playing a game of "tight" and "loose" with the tortoise, and that he had tied him up and left him there to starve. The leopard then implored the bush rat to cut the ropes with his sharp teeth. The bush rat was very sorry for the leopard; but at the same time he knew that, if he let the leopard go, he would most likely be killed and eaten, so he hesitated, and said that he did not quite see his way to cutting the ropes. But this bush rat, being rather kind-hearted, and having had some experience of traps himself, could sympathise with the leopard in his uncomfortable position. He therefore thought for a time, and then hit upon a plan. He first started to dig a hole under the tree, quite regardless of the leopard's cries. When he had finished the hole he came out and cut one of the ropes, and immediately ran into his hole, and waited there to see what would happen; but although the leopard struggled frantically, he could not get loose, as the tortoise had tied him up so fast. After a time, when he saw that there was no danger, the bush rat crept out again and very carefully bit through another rope, and then retired to his hole as before. Again nothing happened, and he began to feel more confidence, so he bit several strands through one after the other until at last the leopard was free. The leopard, who was ravenous with hunger, instead of being grateful to the bush rat, directly he was free, made a dash at the bush rat with his big paw, but just missed him, as the bush rat had dived for his hole; but he was not quite quick enough to escape altogether, and the leopard's sharp claws scored his back and left marks which he carried to his grave.
Ever since then the bush rats have had white spots on their skins, which represent the marks of the leopard's claws.

Udo Ubok Udom was a famous king who lived at Itam, which is an inland town, and does not possess a river. The king and his wife therefore used to wash at the spring just behind their house.
King Udo had a daughter, of whom he was very fond, and looked after her most carefully, and she grew up into a beautiful woman.
For some time the king had been absent from his house, and had not been to the spring for two years. When he went to his old place to wash, he found that the Idem Ju Ju tree had grown up all round the place, and it was impossible for him to use the spring as he had done formerly. He therefore called fifty of his young men to bring their matchets and cut down the tree. They started cutting the tree, but it had no effect, as, directly they made a cut in the tree, it closed up again; so, after working all day, they found they had made no impression on it.
When they returned at night, they told the king that they had been unable to destroy the tree. He was very angry when he heard this, and went to the spring the following morning, taking his own matchet with him.
When the Ju Ju tree saw that the king had come himself and was starting to try to cut his branches, he caused a small splinter of wood to go into the king's eye. This gave the king great pain, so he threw down his matchet and went back to his house. The pain, however, got worse, and he could not eat or sleep for three days.
He therefore sent for his witch men, and told them to cast lots to find out why he was in such pain. When they had cast lots, they decided that the reason was that the Ju Ju tree was angry with the king because he wanted to wash at the spring, and had tried to destroy the tree.
They then told the king that he must take seven baskets of flies, a white goat, a white chicken, and a piece of white cloth, and make a sacrifice of them in order to satisfy the Ju Ju.
The king did this, and the witch men tried their lotions on the king's eye, but it got worse and worse.
He then dismissed these witches and got another lot. When they arrived they told the king that, although they could do nothing themselves to relieve his pain, they knew one man who lived in the spirit land who could cure him; so the king told them to send for him at once, and he arrived the next day,
Then the spirit man said, "Before I do anything to your eye, what will you give me? " So King Udo, said, ""will give you half my town with the people in it, also seven cows and some money." But the spirit man refused to accept the king's offer. As the king was in such pain, he said, "Name your own price, and I will pay you." So the spirit man said the only thing he was willing to accept as payment was the king's daughter. At this the king cried very much, and told the man to go away, as he would rather die than let him have his daughter.
That night the pain was worse than ever, and some of his subjects pleaded with the king to send for the spirit man again and give him his daughter, and told him that when he got well he could no doubt have another daughter but that if he died now he would lose everything.
The king then sent for the spirit man again, who came very quickly, and in great grief, the king handed his daughter to the spirit.
The spirit man then went out into the bush, and collected some leaves, which he soaked in water and beat up. The juice he poured into the king's eye, and told him that when he washed his face in the morning he would be able to see what was troubling him in the eye.
The king tried to persuade him to stay the night, but the spirit man refused, and departed that same night for the spirit land, taking the king's daughter with him.
Before it was light the king rose up and washed his face, and found that the small splinter from the Ju Ju tree, which had been troubling him so much, dropped out of his eye, the pain disappeared, and he was quite well again.
When he came to his proper senses he realised that he had sacrificed his daughter for one of his eyes, so he made an order that there should be general mourning throughout his kingdom for three years.
For the first two years of the mourning the king's daughter was put in the fatting house by the spirit man, and was given food; but a skull, who was in the house, told her not to eat, as they were fatting her up, not for marriage, but so that they could eat her. She therefore gave all the food which was brought to her to the skull, and lived on chalk herself.
Towards the end of the third year the spirit man brought some of his friends to see the king's daughter, and told them he would kill her the next day, and they would have a good feast off her.
When she woke up in the morning the spirit man brought her food as usual; but the skull, who wanted to preserve her life, and who had heard what the spirit man had said, called her into the room and told her what was going to happen later in the day. She handed the food to the skull, and he said, "When the spirit man goes to the wood with his friends to prepare for the feast, you must run back to your father."
He then gave her some medicine which would make her strong for the journey, and also gave her directions as to the road, telling her that there were two roads but that when she came to the parting of the ways she was to drop some of the medicine on the ground and the two roads would become one.
He then told her to leave by the back door, and go through the wood until she came to the end of the town; she would then find the road. If she met people on the road she was to pass them in silence, as if she saluted them they would know that she was a stranger in the spirit land, and might kill her. She was also not to turn round if any one called to her, but was to go straight on till she reached her father's house.
Having thanked the skull for his kind advice, the king's daughter started off, and when she reached the end of the town and found the road, she ran for three hours, and at last arrived at the branch roads. There she dropped the medicine, as she had been instructed, and the two roads immediately became one; so she went straight on and never saluted any one or turned back, although several people called to her.
About this time the spirit man had returned from the wood, and went to the house, only to find the king's daughter was absent. He asked the skull where she was, and he replied that she had gone out by the back door, but he did not know where she had gone to. Being a spirit, however, he very soon guessed that she had gone home; so he followed as quickly as possible, shouting out all the time.
When the girl heard his voice she ran as fast as she could, and at last arrived at her father's house, and told him to take at once a cow, a pig, a sheep, a goat, a dog, a chicken, and seven eggs, and cut them into seven parts as a sacrifice, and leave them on the road, so that when the spirit man saw these things he would stop and not enter the town. This the king did immediately, and made the sacrifice as his daughter had told him.
When the spirit man saw the sacrifice on the road, he sat down and at once began to eat.
When he had satisfied his appetite, he packed up the remainder and returned to the spirit land, not troubling any more about the king's daughter.
When the king saw that the danger was over, he beat his drum, and declared- that for the future, when people died and went to the spirit land, they should not come to earth again as spirits to cure sick people.

The elephant and the hippopotamus always used to feed together, and were good friends.
One day when they were both dining together, the tortoise appeared and said that although they were both big and strong, neither of them could pull him out of the water with a strong piece of tie-tie, and he offered the elephant ten thousand rods if he could draw him out of the river the next day. The elephant, seeing that the tortoise was very small, said, "If I cannot draw you out of the water, I will give you twenty thousand rods." So on the following morning the tortoise got some very strong tie-tie and made it fast to his leg, and went down to the river. When he got there, as he knew the place well, he made the tie-tie fast round a big rock, and left the other end on the shore for the elephant to pull by, then went down to the bottom of the river and hid himself. The elephant then came down and started pulling, and after a time he smashed the rope.
Directly this happened, the tortoise undid the rope from the rock and came to the land, showing all people that the rope was still fast to his leg, but that the elephant had failed to pull him out. The elephant was thus forced to admit that the tortoise was the winner, and paid to him the twenty thousand rods, as agreed. The tortoise then took the rods home to his wife, and they lived together very happily.
After three months had passed, the tortoise, seeing that the money was greatly reduced, thought he would make some more by the same trick, so he went to the hippopotamus and made the same bet with him. The hippopotamus said, "I will make the bet, but I shall take the water and you shall take the land; I will then pull you into the water."
To this the tortoise agreed, so they went down to the river as before, and having got some strong tie-tie, the tortoise made it fast to the hippopotamus' hind leg, and told him to go into the water. Directly the hippo had turned his back and disappeared, the tortoise took the rope twice round a strong palm-tree which was growing near, and then hid himself at the foot of the tree.
When the hippo was tired of pulling, he came up puffing and blowing water into the air from his nostrils. Directly the tortoise saw him coming up, he unwound the rope, and walked down towards the hippopotamus, showing him the tie-tie round his leg. The hippo had to acknowledge that the tortoise was too strong for him, and reluctantly handed over the twenty thousand rods.
The elephant and the hippo then agreed that they would take the tortoise as their friend, as he was so very strong; but he was not really so strong as they thought, and had won because he was so cunning.
He then told them that he would like to live with both of them, but that, as he could not be in two places at the same time, he said that he would leave his son to live with the elephant on the land, and that he himself would live with the hippopotamus in the water.
This explains why there are both tortoises on the land and tortoises who live in the water. The water tortoise is always much the bigger of the two, as there is plenty of fish for him to eat in the river, whereas the land tortoise is often very short of food.

There was once a very beautiful girl called Akim. She was a native of Ibibio, and the name was given to her on account of her good looks, as she was born in the spring-time. She was an only daughter, and her parents were extremely fond of her. The people of the town, and more particularly the young girls, were so jealous of Akim's good looks and beautiful form-for she was perfectly made, very strong, and her carriage, bearing, and manners were most graceful-that her parents would not allow her to join the young girls' society in the town, as is customary for all young people to do, both boys and girls belonging to a company according to their age; a company consisting, as a rule, of all the boys or girls born in the same year.
Akim's parents were rather poor, but she was a good daughter, and gave them no trouble, so they had a happy home. One day as Akim was on her way to draw water from the spring she met the company of seven girls, to which in an ordinary way she would have belonged, if her parents had not for bidden her. These girls told her that they were going to hold a play in the town in three days' time, and asked her to join them. She said she was very sorry, but that her parents were poor, and only had herself to work for them, she therefore had no time to spare for dancing and plays. She then left them and went home.
In the evening the seven girls met together, and as they were very envious of Akim, they discussed how they should be revenged upon her for refusing to join their company, and they talked for a long time as to how they could get Akim into danger or punish her in some way.
At last one of the girls suggested that they should all go to Akim's house every day and help her with her work, so that when they had made friends with her they would be able to entice her away and take their revenge upon her for being more beautiful than themselves. Although they went every day and helped Akim and her parents with their work, the parents knew that they were jealous of their daughter, and repeatedly warned her not on any account to go with them, as they were not to be trusted.
At- the end of the year there was going to be a big play, called the new yam play, to which Akim's parents had been invited. The play was going to be held at a town about two hours' march from where they lived. Akim was very anxious to go and take part in the dance, but her parents gave her plenty of work to do before they started, thinking that this would surely prevent her going, as she was a very obedient daughter, and always did her work properly.
On the morning of the play the jealous seven came to Akim and asked her to go with them, but she pointed to all the water-pots she had to fill, and showed them where her parents had told her to polish the walls with a stone and make the floor good; and after that was finished she had to pull up all the weeds round the house and clean up all round. She therefore said it was impossible for her to leave the house until all the work was finished. When the girls heard this they took up the water-pots, went to the spring, and quickly returned with them full; they placed them in a row, and then they got stones, and very soon had the walls polished and the floor made good; after that they did the weeding outside and the cleaning up, and when everything was completed they said to Akim, "Now then, come along; you have no excuse to remain behind, as all the work is done."
Akim really wanted to go to the play; so as all the work was done which her parents had told her to do, she finally consented to go. About half-way to the town, where the new yam play was being held, there was a small river, about five feet deep, which had to be crossed by wading, as there was no bridge. In this river there was a powerful Ju Ju, whose law was that whenever any one crossed the river and returned the same way on the return journey, whoever it was, had to give some food to the Ju Ju. If they did not make the proper sacrifice the Ju Ju dragged them down and took them to his home, and kept them there to work for him. The seven jealous girls knew all about this Ju Ju, having often crossed the river before, as they walked about all over the country, and had plenty of friends in the different towns. Akim, however, who was a good girl, and never went anywhere, knew nothing about this Ju Ju, which her companions had found out.
When the work was finished they all started off together, and crossed the river without any trouble. When they had gone a small distance on the other side they saw a small bird, perched on a high tree, who admired Akim very much, and sang in praise of her beauty, much to the annoyance of the seven girls; but they walked on without saying anything, and eventually arrived at, the town where the play was being held. Akim had not taken the trouble to change her clothes, but when she arrived at the town, although her companions had on all their best beads and their finest clothes, the young men and people admired Akim far more than the other girls, and she was declared to be the finest and most beautiful woman at the dance. They gave her plenty of palm wine, foo-foo, and everything she wanted, so that the seven girls became more angry and jealous than be fore. The people danced and sang all that night, but Akim managed to keep out of the sight of her parents until the following morning, when they asked her how it was that she had disobeyed them and neglected her work; so Akim told them that the work had all been done by her friends, and they had enticed her to come to the play with them Her mother then told her to return home at once, and that she was not to remain in the town any longer.
When Akim told her friends this they said, "Very well, we are just going to have some small meal, and then we will return with you." They all then sat down together and had their food, but each of the seven jealous girls hid a small quantity of foo-foo and fish in her clothes for the Water Ju Ju. However Akim, who knew nothing about this, as her parents had forgotten to tell her about the Ju Ju, never thinking for one moment that their daughter would cross the river, did not take any food as a sacrifice to the Ju Ju with her.
When they arrived at the river Akim saw the girls making their small sacrifices, and begged them to give her a small share so that she could do the same, but they refused, and all walked across the river safely. Then when it was Akim's turn to cross, when she arrived in the middle of the river, the Water Ju Ju caught hold of her and dragged her underneath the water, so that she immediately disappeared from sight. The seven girls had been watching for this, and when they saw that she had gone they went on their way, very pleased at the success of their scheme, and said to one another, "Now Akim is gone for ever, and we shall hear no more about her being better-looking than we are."
As there was no one to be seen at the time when Akim disappeared they naturally thought that their cruel action had escaped detection, so they went home rejoicing; but they never noticed the little bird high up in the tree who had sung of Akim's beauty when they were on their way to the play. The little bird was very sorry for Akim, and made up his mind that, when the proper time came, he would tell her parents what he had seen, so that perhaps they would be able to save her. The bird had heard Akim asking for a small portion of the food to make a sacrifice with, and had heard all the girls refusing to give her any.
The following morning, when Akim's parents returned home, they were much surprised to find that the door was fastened, and that there was no sign of their daughter anywhere about the place, so they inquired of their neighbours, but no one was able to give them any information about her. They then went to the seven girls, and asked them what had become of Akim. They replied that they did not know what had become of her, but that she had reached their town safely with them, and then said she was going home. The father then went to his Ju Ju man, who, by casting lots, discovered what had happened, and told him that on her way back from the play Akim had crossed the river without making the customary sacrifice to the Water Ju Ju, and that, as the Ju Ju was angry, he had seized Akim and taken her to his home. He therefore told Akim's father to take one goat, one basketful of eggs, and one piece of white cloth to the river in the morning, and to offer them as a sacrifice to the Water Ju Ju; then Akim would be thrown out of the water seven times, but that if her father failed to catch her on the seventh time, she would disappear for ever.
Akim's father then returned home, and, when he arrived there, the little bird who had seen Akim taken by the Water Ju Ju, told him everything that had happened, confirming the Ju Ju's words. He also said that it was entirely the fault of the seven girls, who had refused to give Akim any food to make the sacrifice with.
Early the following morning the parents went to the river, and made the sacrifice as advised by the Ju Ju. Immediately they had done so, the Water Ju Ju threw Akim. up from the middle of the river.
Her father caught her at once, and returned home very thankfully.
He never told any one, however, that he had recovered his daughter, but made up his mind to punish the seven jealous girls, so he dug a deep pit in the middle of his house, and placed dried palm leaves and sharp stakes in the bottom of the pit. He then covered the top of the pit with new mats, and sent out word for all people to come and hold a play to rejoice with him, as he had recovered his daughter from the spirit land. Many people came, and danced and sang all the day and night, but the seven jealous girls did not appear, as they were frightened. However, as they were told that everything had gone well on the previous day, and that there had been no trouble, they went to the house the following morning and mixed with the dancers; but they were ashamed to look Akim in the face, who was sitting down in the middle of the dancing ring.
When Akim's father saw the seven girls he pretended to welcome them as his daughter's friends, and presented each of them with a brass rod, which he placed round their necks. He also gave them tombo to drink.
He then picked them out, and told them to go and sit on mats on the other side of the pit he had prepared for them. When they walked over the mats which hid the pit they all fell in, and Akim's father immediately got some red-hot ashes from the fire and threw them in on top of the screaming girls, who were in great pain. At once the dried palm leaves caught fire, killing all the girls at once.
When the people heard the cries and saw the smoke, they all ran back to the town.
The next day the parents of the dead girls went to the head chief, and complained that Akim's father had killed their daughters, so the chief called him before him, and asked him for an explanation.
Akim's father went at once to the chief, taking the Ju Ju man, whom everybody relied upon, and the small bird, as his witnesses.
When the chief had heard the whole case, he told Akim's father that he should only have killed one girl to avenge his daughter, and not seven. So he told the father to bring Akim before him.
When she arrived, the head chief, seeing how beautiful she was, said that her father was justified in killing all the seven girls on her behalf, so he dismissed the case, and told the parents of the dead girls to go away and mourn for their daughters, who had been wicked and jealous women, and had been properly punished for their cruel behaviour to Akim.

Very many years ago, before the oldest man alive at the present time can remember, the towns of Ikom, Okuni, Abijon, Insofan, Obokum, and all the other Injor towns were situated round and near the Insofan Mountain, and the head chief of the whole country was called Agbor. Abragba and Enfitop also lived there, and were also under King Agbor. The Insofan Mountain is about two days' march inland from the Cross River, and as none of the people there could swim, and knew nothing about canoes, they never went anywhere outside their own country, and were afraid to go down to the big river. The whole country was taken up with yam farms, and was divided amongst the various towns, each town having its own bush. At the end of each year, when it was time to dig the yams, there was a big play held, which was called the New Yam feast. At this festival there was always a big human sacrifice, fifty slaves being killed in one day. These slaves were tied up to trees in a row, and many drums were beaten; then a strong man, armed with a sharp matchet, went from one slave to another and cut their heads off. This was done to cool the new yams, so that they would not hurt the stomachs of the people. Until this sacrifice was made no one in the country would eat a new yam, as they knew, if they did so, they would suffer great pain in their insides.
When the feast was held, all the towns brought one hundred yams each as a present to King Agbor. When the slaves were all killed fires were lit, and the dead bodies were placed over the fires to burn the hair off. A number of plantain leaves were then gathered and placed on the ground, and the bodies, having been cut into pieces, were placed on the plantain leaves.
When the yams were skinned, they were put into large pots, with water, oil, pepper, and salt. The cut-up bodies were then put in on top, and the pots covered up with other clay pots and left to boil for an hour.
The king, having called all the people together, then declared the New Yam feast had commenced, and singing and dancing were kept up for three days and nights, during which time much palm wine was consumed, and all the bodies and yams, which had been provided for them, were eaten by the people.
The heads were given to the king for his share, and, when he had finished eating them, the skulls were placed before the Ju Ju with some new yams, so that there should be a good crop the following season.
But although these natives ate the dead bodies of the slaves at the New Yam feast, they did not eat human flesh during the rest of the year.
This went on for many years, until at last the Okuni people noticed that the graves of the people who had been buried were frequently dug open and the bodies removed. This caused great wonder, and, as they did not like the idea of their dead relations being taken away, they made a complaint to King Agbor. He at once caused a watch to be set on all newly dug graves, and that very night they caught seven men, who were very greedy, and used to come whenever a body was buried, dig it up, and carry it into the bush, where they made a fire, and cooked and ate it.
When they were caught, the people made them show where they lived, and where they cooked the bodies.
After walking for some hours in the forest, they came to a place where large heaps of human bones and skulls were found.
The seven men were then securely fastened up and brought before King Agbor, who held a large palaver of all the towns, and the whole situation was discussed.
Agbor said that this bad custom would necessitate all the towns separating, as they could not allow their dead relations to be dug up and eaten by these greedy people, and he could see no other way to prevent it. Agbor then gave one of the men to each of the seven towns, and told some of them to go on the far side of the big river and make their towns there. The others were to go farther down the river on the same side as Insofan Mountain, and when they found suitable places, they were each to kill their man as a sacrifice and then build their town.
All the towns then departed, and when they had found good sites, they built their towns there.
When they had all gone, after a time Agbor began to feel very lonely, so he left the site of his old town and also went to the Cross River to live, so that he could see his friends.
After that the New Yam feast was held in each town, and the people still continued to kill and eat a few slaves at the feast, but the bodies of their relations and friends were kept for a long time above ground until they had become rotten, so that the greedy people should not dig them up and eat them.
This is why, even at the present time, the people do not like to bury their dead relations until they have become putrid.

In the olden days there were no hooks or casting nets, so that when the natives wanted to catch fish they made baskets and set traps at the river side.
One man named Akon Obo, who was very poor, began to make baskets and traps out of bamboo palm, and then when the river went down he used to take his traps to a pool and set them baited with palm-nuts. In the night the big fish used to smell the palm-nuts and go into the trap, when at once the door would fall down, and in the morning Akon Obo would go and take the fish out. He was very successful in his fishing, and used to sell the fish in the market for plenty of money. When he could afford to pay the dowry he married a woman named Eyong, a native of Okuni, and had three children by her, but he still continued his fishing. The eldest son was called Odey, the second Yambi, and the third Atuk. These three boys, when they grew up, helped their father with his fishing, and he gradually became wealthy and bought plenty of slaves. At last he joined the Egbo society, and became one of the chiefs of the town. Even after he became a chief, he and his sons still continued to fish.
One day, when he was crossing the river in a small dug-out canoe, a tornado came on very suddenly and the canoe capsized, drowning the chief, When his sons heard of the death of their father, they wanted to go and drown themselves also, but they were persuaded not to by the people. After searching for two days, they found the dead body some distance down the river, and brought it back to the town. They then called their company together to play, dance, and sing for twelve days, in accordance with their native custom, and much palm wine was drunk.
When the play was finished, they took their father's body to a hollowed-out cavern, and placed two live slaves with it, one holding a native lamp of palm-oil, and the other holding a matchet. They were both tied up, so that they could not escape, and were left there to keep watch over the dead chief, until they died of starvation.
When the cave was covered in, the sons called the chiefs together, and they played Egbo for seven days, which used up a lot of their late father's money. When the play was over, the chiefs were surprised at the amount of money which the sons had been able to spend on the funeral of their father, as they knew how poor he had been as a young man. They therefore called him the lucky fisherman.

A chief of Inde named Inkita had a son named Ayong Kita, whose mother had died at his birth.
The old chief was a hunter, and used to take his son out with him when he went into the bush. He used to do most of his hunting in the long grass which grows over nearly all the Inde country, and used to kill plenty of bush buck in the dry season.
In those days the people had no guns, so the chief had to shoot everything he got with his bow and arrows, which required a lot of skill.
When his little son was old enough, he gave him a small bow and some small arrows, and taught him how to shoot. The little boy was very quick at learning, and by continually practising at lizards and small birds, soon became expert in the use of his little bow, and could hit them almost every time he shot at them.
When the boy was ten years old his father died, and as he thus became the head of his father's house, and was in authority over all the slaves, they became very discontented, and made plans to kill him, so he ran away into the bush.
Having nothing to eat, he lived for several days on the nuts which fell from the palm trees. He was too young to kill any large animals, and only had his small bow and arrows, with which he killed a few squirrels, bush rats, and small birds, and so managed to live.
Now once at night, when he was sleeping in the hollow of a tree, he had a dream in which his father appeared, and told him where there was plenty of treasure buried in the earth, but, being a small boy, he was frightened, and did not go to the place.
One day, some time after the dream, having walked far and being very thirsty, he went to a lake, and was just going to drink, when he heard a hissing sound, and heard a voice tell him not to drink. Not seeing any one, he was afraid, and ran away without drinking.
Early next morning, when he was out with his bow trying to shoot some small animal, he met an old woman with quite long hair. She was so ugly that he thought she must be a witch, so he tried to run, but she told him not to fear, as she wanted to help him and assist him to rule over his late father's house. She also told him that it was she who had called out to him at the lake not to drink, as there was a bad Ju Ju in the water which would have killed him. The old woman then took Ayong to a stream some little distance from the lake, and bending down, took out a small shining stone from the water, which she gave to him, at the same time telling him to go to the place which his father had advised him to visit in his dream. She then said, "When you get there you must dig, and you will find plenty of money; you must then go and buy two strong slaves, and when you have got them, you must take them into the forest, away from the town, and get them to build you a house with several rooms in it. You must then place the stone in one of the rooms, and whenever you want anything, all you have to do is to go into the room and tell the stone what you want, and your wishes will be at once gratified."
Ayong did as the old woman told him, and after much difficulty and danger bought the two slaves and built a house in the forest, taking great care of the precious stone, which he placed in an inside room. Then for some time, whenever he wanted anything, he used to go into the room and ask for a sufficient number of rods to buy what he wanted, and they were always brought at once.
This went on for many years, and Ayong grew up to be a man, and became very rich, and bought many slaves, having made friends with the Aro men, who in those days used to do a big traffic in slaves. After ten years had passed Ayong had quite a large town and many slaves, but one night the old woman appeared to him in a dream and told him that she thought that he was sufficiently wealthy, and that it was time for him to return the magic stone to the small stream from whence it came. But Ayong, although he was rich, wanted to rule his father's house and be a head chief for all the Inde country, so he sent for all the Ju Ju men in the country and two witch men, and marched with all his slaves to his father's town. Before he started he held a big palaver, and told them to point out any slave who had a bad heart, and who might kill him when he came to rule the country. Then the Ju Ju men consulted together, and pointed out fifty of the slaves who, they said, were witches, and would try to kill Ayong. He at once had them made prisoners, and tried them by the ordeal of Esere bean to see whether they were witches or not. As none of them could vomit the beans they all died, and were declared to be witches. He then had them buried at once. When the remainder of his slaves saw what had happened, they all came to him and begged his pardon, and promised to serve him faithfully. Although the fifty men were buried they could not rest, and troubled Ayong very much, and after a time he became very sick himself, so he sent again for the Ju Ju men, who told him that it was the witch men who, although they were dead and buried, had power to come out at night and used to suck Ayong's blood, which was the cause of his sickness. They then said, "We are only three Ju Ju men; you must get seven more of us, making the magic number of ten." When they came they dug up the bodies of the fifty witches, and found they were quite fresh. Then Ayong had big fires made, and burned them one after the other, and gave the Ju Ju men a big present. He soon after became quite well again, and took possession of his father's property, and ruled over all the country.
Ever since then, whenever any one is accused of being a witch, they are tried by the ordeal of the poisonous Esere bean, and if they can vomit they do not die, and are declared innocent, but if they cannot do so, they die in great pain.

A man called Akpan, who was a native of Oku, a town in the Ibibio country, admired a girl called Emme very much, who lived at Ibibio, and wished to marry her, as she was the finest girl in her company. It was the custom in those days for the parents to demand such a large amount for their daughters as dowry, that if after they were married they failed to get on with their husbands, as they could not redeem themselves, they were sold as slaves. Akpan paid a very large sum as dowry for Emme, and she was put in the fatting-house until the proper time arrived for her to marry.
Akpan told the parents that when their daughter was ready they must send her over to him. This they promised to do. Emme's father was a rich man, and after seven years had elapsed, and it became time for her to go to her husband, he saw a very fine girl, who had also just come out of the fatting-house, and whom the parents wished to sell as a slave. Emme's father therefore bought her, and gave her to his daughter as her handmaiden.
The next day Emme's little sister, being very anxious to go with her, obtained the consent of her mother, and they started off together, the slave girl carrying a large bundle containing clothes and presents from Emme's father. Akpan's house was a long day's march from where they lived. When they arrived just outside the town they came to a spring, where the people used to get their drinking water from, but no one was allowed to bathe there. Emme, however, knew nothing about this. They took off their clothes to wash close to the spring, and where there was a deep hole which led to the Water Ju Ju's house. The slave girl knew of this Ju Ju, and thought if she could get her mistress to bathe, she would be taken by the Ju Ju, and she would then be able to take her place and marry Akpan. So they went down to bathe, and when they were close to the water the slave girl pushed her mistress in, and she at once disappeared. The little girl then began to cry, but the slave girl said, "If you cry any more I will kill you at once, and throw your body into the hole after your sister." And she told the child that she must never mention what had happened to any one, and particularly not to Akpan, as she was going to represent her sister and marry him, and that if she ever told any one what she had seen, she would be killed at once. She then made the little girl carry her load to Akpan's house.
When they arrived, Akpan was very much disappointed at the slave girl's appearance, as she was not nearly as pretty and fine as he had expected her to be; but as he had not seen Emme for seven years, he had no suspicion that the girl was not really Emme, for whom he had paid such a large dowry. He then called all his company together to play and feast, and when they arrived they were much astonished, and said, "Is this the fine woman for whom you paid so much dowry, and whom you told us so much about?" And Akpan could not answer them.
The slave girl was then for some time very cruel to Emme's little sister, and wanted her to die, so that her position would be more secure with her husband. She beat the little girl every day, and always made her carry the largest water-pot to the spring; she also made the child place her finger in the fire to use as firewood. When the time came for food, the slave girl went to the fire and got a burning piece of wood and burned the child all over the body with it. When Akpan asked her why she treated the child so badly, she replied that she was a slave that her father had bought for her. When the little girl took the heavy water-pot to the river to fill it there was no one to lift it up for her, so that she could not get it on to her head; she therefore had to remain a long time at the spring, and at last began calling for her sister Emme to come and help her.
When Emme heard her little sister crying for her, she begged the Water Ju Ju to allow her to go and help her, so he told her she might go, but that she must return to him again immediately. When the little girl saw her sister she did not want to leave her, and asked to be allowed to go into the hole with her. She then told Emme how very badly she had been treated by the slave girl, and her elder sister told her to have patience and wait, that a day of vengeance would arrive sooner or later. The little girl went back to Akpan's house with a glad heart as she had seen her sister, but when she got to the house, the slave girl said, "Why have you been so long getting the water?" and then took another stick from the fire and burnt the little girl again very badly, and starved her for the rest of the day.
This went on for some time, until, one day, when the child went to the river for water, after all the people had gone, she cried out for her sister as usual, but she did not come for a long time, as there was a hunter from Akpan's town hidden near watching the hole, and the Water Ju Ju told Emme that she must not go; but, as the little girl went on crying bitterly, Emme at last persuaded the Ju Ju to let her go, promising to return quickly. When she emerged from the water, she looked very beautiful with the rays of the setting sun shining on her glistening body. She helped her little sister with her water-pot, and then disappeared into the hole again.
The hunter was amazed at what he had seen, and when he returned, he told Akpan what a beautiful woman had come out of the water and had helped the little girl with her water-pot. He also told Akpan that he was convinced that the girl he had seen at the spring was his proper wife, Emme, and that the Water Ju Ju must have taken her.
Akpan then made up his mind to go out and watch and see what happened, so, in the early morning the hunter came for him, and they both went down to the river, and hid in the forest near the water-hole.
When Akpan saw Emme come out of the water, he recognised her at once, and went home and considered how he should get her out of the power of the Water Ju Ju. He was advised by some of his friends to go to an old woman, who frequently made sacrifices to the Water Ju Ju, and consult her as to what was the best thing to do.
When he went to her, she told him to bring her one white slave, one white goat, one piece of white cloth, one white chicken, and a basket of eggs. Then, when the great Ju Ju day arrived, she would take them to the Water Ju Ju, and make a sacrifice of them on his behalf. The day after the sacrifice was made, the Water Ju Ju would return the girl to her, and she would bring her to Akpan.
Akpan then bought the slave, and took all the other things to the old woman, and, when the day of the sacrifice arrived, he went with his friend the hunter and witnessed the old woman make the sacrifice. The slave was bound up and led to the hole, then the old woman called to the Water Ju Ju and cut the slave's throat with a sharp knife and pushed him into the hole. She then did the same to the goat and chicken, and also threw the eggs and cloth in on top of them.
After this had been done, they all returned to their homes. The next morning at dawn the old woman went to the hole, and found Emme standing at the side of the spring, so she told her that she was her friend, and was going to take her to her husband. She then took Emme back to her own home, and hid her in her room, and sent word to Akpan to come to her house, and to take great care that the slave woman knew nothing about the matter.
So Akpan left the house secretly by the back door, and arrived at the old woman's house without meeting anybody.
When Emme saw Akpan, she asked for her little sister, so he sent his friend, the hunter, for her to the spring, and he met her carrying her water-pot to get the morning supply of water for the house, and brought her to the old woman's house with him.
When Emme had embraced her sister, she told her to return to the house and do something to annoy the slave woman, and then she was to run as fast as she could back to the old woman's house, where, no doubt, the slave girl would follow her, and would meet them all inside the house, and see Emme, who she believed she had killed.
The little girl did as she was told, and, directly she got into the house, she called out to the slave woman: "Do you know that you are a wicked woman, and have treated me very badly? I know you are only my sister's slave, and you will be properly punished." She then ran as hard as she could to the old woman's house. Directly the slave woman heard what the little girl said, she was quite mad with rage, and seized a burning stick from the fire, and ran after the child; but the little one got to the house first, and ran inside, the slave woman following close upon her heels with the burning stick in her hand.
Then Emme came out and confronted the slave woman, and she at once recognised her mistress, whom she thought she had killed, so she stood quite still.
Then they all went back to Akpan's house, and when they arrived there, Akpan asked the slave woman what she meant by pretending that she was Emme, and why she had tried to kill her. But, seeing she was found out, the slave woman had nothing to say.
Many people were then called to a play to celebrate the recovery of Akpan's wife, and when they had all come, he told them what the slave woman had done.
After this, Emme treated the slave girl in the same way as she had treated her little sister. She made her put her fingers in the fire, and burnt her with sticks. She also made her beat foo-foo with her head in a hollowed-out tree, and after a time she was tied up to a tree and starved to death.
Ever since that time, when a man marries a girl, he is always present when she comes out of the fatting-house and takes her home himself, so that such evil things as happened to Emme and her sister may not occur again.

When 'Ndarake was King of Idu, being young and rich, he was very fond of fine girls, and had plenty of slaves. The 'Nsiat bird was then living at Idu, and had a very pretty daughter, whom 'Ndarake wished to marry. When he spoke to the father about the matter, he replied that of course he had no objection personally, as it would be a great honour for his daughter to marry the king, but, unfortunately, when any of his family had children, they always gave birth to twins, which, as the king knew, was not allowed in the country; the native custom being to kill both the children and throw them into the bush, the mother being driven away and allowed to starve. The king, however, being greatly struck with Adit, the bird's daughter, insisted on marrying her, so the 'Nsiat bird had to agree. A large amount of dowry was paid by the king, and a big play and feast was held. One strong slave was told to carry Adit 'Nsiat during the whole play, and she sat on his shoulders with her legs around his neck; this was done to show what a rich and powerful man the king was.
After the marriage, in due course Adit gave birth to twins, as her mother had done before her. The king immediately became very fond of the two babies, but according to the native custom, which was too strong for any one to resist, he had to give them up to be killed, When the 'Nsiat bird heard this, he went to the king and reminded him that he had warned the king before he married what would happen if he married Adit, and rather than that the twins should be killed, he and the whole of his family would leave the earth and dwell in the air, taking the twins with them. As the king was so fond of Adit and the two children, and did not want them to be killed, he gladly consented, and the 'Nsiat bird took the whole of his family, as well as Adit and her two children, away, and left the earth to live and make their home in the trees; but as they had formerly lived in the town with all the people, they did not like to go into the forest, so they made their nests in the trees which grew in the town, and that is why you always see the 'Nsiat birds living and making their nests only in places where human beings are. The black birds are the cocks, and the golden-coloured ones are the hens. It was the beautiful colour of Adit which first attracted the attention of 'Ndarake and caused him to marry her.

Chief Oborri lived at a town called Adiagor, which is on the right bank of the Calabar River. He was a wealthy chief, and belonged to the Egbo Society. He had many large canoes, and plenty of slaves to paddle them. These canoes he used to fill up with new yams-each canoe being under one head slave and containing eight paddles; the canoes were capable of holding three puncheons of palm-oil, and cost eight hundred rods each. When they were full, about ten of them used to start off together and paddle to Rio del Rey. They went through creeks all the way, which run through mangrove swamps, with palm-oil trees here and there. Sometimes in the tornado season it was very dangerous crossing the creeks, as the canoes were so heavily laden, having only a few inches above the water, that quite a small wave would fill the canoe and cause it to sink to the bottom. Although most of the boys could swim, it often happened that some of them were lost, as there are many large alligators in these waters. After four days' hard paddling they would arrive at Rio del Rey where they had very little difficulty in exchanging their new yams for bags of dried shrimps and sticks with smoked fish on them.
Chief Oborri had two sons, named Eyo I. and Essido. Their mother having died when they were babies, the children were brought up by their father. As they grew up, they developed entirely different characters. The eldest was very hard-working and led a solitary life; but the younger son was fond of gaiety and was very lazy, in fact, he spent most of his time in the neighbouring towns playing and dancing. When the two boys arrived at the respective ages of eighteen and twenty their father died, and they were left to look after themselves. According to native custom, the elder son, Eyo I., was entitled to the whole of his father's estate; but being very fond of his younger brother, he gave him a large number of rods and some land with a house. Immediately Essido became possessed of the money he became wilder than ever, gave big feasts to his companions, and always had his house full of women, upon whom he spent large sums. Although the amount his brother had given him on his father's death was very large, in the course of a few years

Essido had spent it all. He then sold his house and effects, and spent the proceeds on feasting.
While he had been living this gay and unprofitable life, Eyo I. had been working harder than ever at his father's old trade, and had made many trips to Rio del Rey himself. Almost every week he had canoes laden with yams going down river and returning after about twelve days with shrimps and fish, which Eyo I. himself disposed of in the neighbouring markets, and he very rapidly became a rich man. At intervals he remonstrated with Essido on his extravagance, but his warnings had no effect; if anything, his brother became worse. At last the time arrived when all his money was spent, so Essido went to his brother and asked him to lend him two thousand rods, but Eyo refused, and told Essido that he would not help him in any way to continue his present life of debauchery, but that if he liked to work on the farm and trade, he would give him a fair share of the profits. This Essido indignantly refused, and went back to the town and consulted some of the very few friends he had left as to what was the best thing to do.
The men he spoke to were thoroughly bad men, and had been living upon Essido for a long time. They suggested to him that he should go round the town and borrow money from the people he had entertained, and then they would run away to Akpabryos town, which was about four days' march from Calabar. This Essido did, and managed to borrow a lot of money, although many people re fused to lend him anything. Then at night he set off with his evil companions, who carried his money, as they had not been able to borrow any themselves, being so well known. When they arrived at Akpabryos town they found many beautiful women and graceful dancers. They then started the same life again, until after a few weeks most of the money had gone. They then met and consulted together how to get more money, and advised Essido to return to his rich brother, pretending that he was going to work and give up his old life; he should then get poison from a man they knew of, and place it in his brother's food, so that he would die, and then Essido would become possessed of all his brother's wealth, and they would be able to live in the same way as they had formerly. Essido, who had sunk very low, agreed to this plan, and they left Akpabryos town the next morning. After marching for two days, they arrived at a small hut in the bush where a man who was an expert poisoner lived, called Okponesip. He was the head Ju Ju man of the country, and when they had bribed him with eight hundred rods he swore them to secrecy, and gave Essido a small parcel containing a deadly poison which he said would kill his brother in three months. All he had to do was to place the poison in his brother's food.
When Essido returned to his brother's house he pretended to be very sorry for his former mode of living, and said that for the future he was going to work. Eyo I. was very glad when he heard this, and at once asked his brother in, and gave him new clothes and plenty to eat.
In the evening, when supper was being prepared, Essido went into the kitchen, pretending he wanted to get a light from the fire for his pipe. The cook being absent and no one about, he put the poison in the soup, and then returned to the living-room. He then asked for some tombo, which was brought, and when he had finished it, he said he did not want any supper, and went to sleep. His brother, Eyo I., had supper by himself and consumed all the soup. In a week's time he began to feel very ill, and as the days passed he became worse, so he sent for his Ju Ju man.
When Essido saw him coming, he quietly left the house; but the Ju Ju man, by casting lots, very soon discovered that it was Essido who had given poison to his brother. When he told Eyo I. this, he would not believe it, and sent him away. However, when Essido returned, his elder brother told him what the Ju Ju man had said, but that he did not believe him for one moment, and had sent him away. Essido was much relieved when he heard this, but as he was anxious that no suspicion of the crime should be attached to him, he went to the Household Ju Ju, and having first sworn that he had never administered poison to his brother, he drank out of the pot.
Three months after he had taken the poison Eyo I. died, much to the grief of every one who knew him, as he was much respected, not only on account of his great wealth, but because he was also an upright and honest man, who never did harm to any one.
Essido kept his brother's funeral according to the usual custom, and there was much playing and dancing, which was kept up for a long time. Then Essido paid off his old creditors in order to make himself popular, and kept open house, entertaining most lavishly, and spending his money in many foolish ways. All the bad women about collected at his house, and his old evil companions went on as they had done before.
Things got so bad that none of the respectable people would have anything to do with him, and at last the chiefs of the country, seeing the way Essido was squandering his late brother's estate, assembled together, and eventually came to the conclusion that he was a witch man, and had poisoned his brother in order to acquire his position. The chiefs, who were all friends of the late Eyo, and who were very sorry at the death, as they knew that if he had lived he would have become a great and powerful chief, made up their minds to give Essido the Ekpawor Ju Ju, which is a very strong medicine, and gets into men's heads, so that when they have drunk it they are compelled to speak the truth, and if they have done wrong they die very shortly. Essido was then told to dress himself and attend the meeting at the palaver house, and when he arrived the chiefs charged him with having killed his brother by witchcraft. Essido denied having done so, but the chiefs told him that if he were innocent he must prove it by drinking the bowl of Ekpawor medicine which was placed before him. As he could not refuse to drink, he drank the bowl off in great fear and trembling, and very soon the Ju Ju having got hold of him, he confessed that he had poisoned his brother, but that his friends had advised him to do so. About two hours after drinking the Ekpawor, Essido died in great pain.
The friends were then brought to the meeting and tied up to posts, and questioned as to the part they had taken in the death of Eyo. As they were too frightened to answer, the chiefs told them that they knew from Essido that they had induced him to poison his brother. They were then taken to the place where Eyo was buried, the grave having been dug open, and their heads were cut off and fell into the grave, and their bodies were thrown in after them as a sacrifice for the wrong they had done. The grave was then filled up again.
Ever since that time, whenever any one is suspected of being a witch, he is tried by the Ekpawor Ju Ju.

In the olden days when Effiong was king of Calabar, it was customary at that time for rulers to give big feasts, to which all the subjects and all the birds of the air and animals of the forest, also the fish and other things that lived in the water, were invited. All the people, birds, animals, and fish, were under the king, and had to obey him. His favourite messenger was the hawk, as he could travel so quickly.
The hawk served the king faithfully for several years, and when he wanted to retire, he asked what the king proposed to do for him, as very soon he would be too old to work any more. So the king told the hawk to bring any living creature, bird or animal, to him, and he would allow the hawk for the future to live on that particular species without any trouble. The hawk then flew over a lot of country, and went from forest to forest, until at last he found a young owl which had tumbled out of its nest. This the hawk brought to the king, who told him that for the future he might eat owls. The hawk then carried the owlet away, and told his friends what the king had said.
One of the wisest of them said, "Tell me when you seized the young owlet, what did the parents say?" And the hawk replied that the father and mother owls kept quite quiet, and never said anything. The hawk's friend then advised him to return the owlet to his parents, as he could never tell what the owls would do to him in the nighttime, and as they had made no noise, they were no doubt plotting in their minds some deep and cruet revenge.
The next day the hawk carried the owlet back to his parents and left him near the nest. He then flew about, trying to find some other bird which would do as his food; but as all the birds had heard that the hawk had seized the owlet, they hid themselves, and would not come out when the hawk was near. He therefore could not catch any birds.
As he was flying home he saw a lot of fowls near a house, basking in the sun and scratching in the dust. There were also several small chickens running about and chasing insects, or picking up anything they could find to eat, with the old hen following them and clucking and calling to them from time to time. When the hawk saw the chickens, he made up his mind that he would take one, so he swooped down and caught the smallest in his strong claws. Immediately he had seized the chicken the cocks began to make a great noise, and the hen ran after him and tried to make him drop her child, calling loudly, with her feathers fluffed out and making dashes at him. But he carried it off, and all the fowls and chickens at once ran screaming into the houses, some taking shelter under bushes and others trying to hide themselves in the long grass. He then carried the chicken to the king, telling him that he had returned the owlet to his parents, as he did not want him for food; so the king told the hawk that for the future he could always feed on chickens.
The hawk then took the chicken home, and his friend who dropped in to see him, asked him what the parents of the chicken had done when they saw their child taken away; so the hawk said-
"They all made a lot of noise, and the old hen chased me, but although there was a great disturbance amongst the fowls, nothing happened."
His friend then said as the fowls had made much palaver, he was quite safe to kill and eat the chickens, as the people who made plenty of noise in the day-time would go to sleep at night and not disturb him, or do him any injury; the only people to be afraid of were those who when they were injured, kept quite silent; you might be certain then that they were plotting mischief, and would do harm in the night-time.

There was once a woman named Aftiong Any who lived at 'Nsidung, a small town to the south of Calabar. She was married to a chief of Hensham Town called Etim Ekeng. They had lived together for several years, but had no children. The chief was very anxious to have a child during his lifetime, and made sacrifices to his Ju Ju, but they had no effect. So he went to a witch man, who told him that the reason he had no children was that he was too rich. The chief then asked the witch man how he should spend his money in order to get a child, and he was told to make friends with everybody, and give big feasts, so that he should get rid of some of his money and become poorer.
The chief then went home and told his wife. The next day his wife called all her company together and gave them a big dinner, which cost a lot of money; much food was consumed, and large quantities of tombo were drunk. Then the chief entertained his company, which cost a lot more money. He also wasted a lot of money in the Egbo house. When half of his property was wasted, his wife told him that she had conceived. The chief, being very glad, called a big play for the next day.
In those days all the rich chiefs of the country belonged to the Alligator Company, and used to meet in the water. The reason they belonged to the company was, first of all, to protect their canoes when they went trading, and secondly, to destroy the canoes and property of the people who did not belong to their company, and to take their money and kill their slaves.
Chief Etim Ekeng was a kind man, and would not join this society, although he was repeatedly urged to do so. After a time a son was born to the chief, and he called him Edet Etim. The chief then called the Egbo society together, and all the doors of the houses in the town were shut, the markets were stopped, and the women were not allowed to go outside their houses while the Egbo was playing. This was kept up for several days, and cost the chief a lot of money. Then he made up his mind that he would divide his property, and give his son half when he became old enough. Unfortunately after three months the chief died, leaving his sorrowing wife to look after their little child.
The wife then went into mourning for seven years for her husband, and after that time she became entitled to all his property, as the late chief had no brothers. She looked after the little boy very care fully until he grew up, when he became a very fine, healthy young man, and was much admired by all the pretty girls of the town; but his mother warned him strongly not to go with them, because they would make him become a bad man. Whenever the girls had a play they used to invite Edet Etim, and at last he went to the play, and they made him beat the drum for them to dance to. After much practice he became the best drummer 'in the town, and whenever the girls had a play they always called him to drum for them. Plenty of the young girls left their husbands, and went to Edet and asked him to marry them. This made all the young men of the town very jealous, and when they met together at night they considered what would be the best way to kill him. At last they decided that when Edet went to bathe they would induce the alligators to take him. So one night, when he was washing, one alligator seized him by the foot, and others came and seized him round the waist. He fought very hard, but at last they dragged him into the deep water, and took him to their home.
When his mother heard this, she determined to do her best to recover her son, so she kept quite quiet until the morning.
When the young men saw that Edet's mother remained quiet, and did not cry, they thought of the story of the hawk and the owl, and determined to keep Edet alive for a few months.
At cockcrow the mother raised a cry, and went to the grave of her dead husband in order to consult his spirit as to what she had better do to recover her lost son. After a time she went down to the beach with small young green branches in her hands, with which she beat the water, and called upon all the Ju Jus of the Calabar River to help her to recover her son. She then went home and got a load of rods, and took them to a Ju Ju man in the farm. His name was Ininen Okon; he was so called because he was very artful, and had plenty of strong Ju Jus.
When the young boys heard that Edet's mother had gone to Ininen Okon, they all trembled with fear, and wanted to return Edet, but they could not do so, as it was against the rules of their society. The Ju Ju man having discovered that Edet was still alive, and was being detained in the alligators' house, told the mother to be patient. After three days Ininen himself joined another alligators' society, and went to inspect the young alligators' house. He found a young man whom he knew, left on guard when all the alligators had gone to feed at the ebb of the tide, and came back and told the mother to wait, as he would make a Ju Ju which would cause them all to depart in seven days, and leave no one in the house. He made his Ju Ju, and the young alligators said that, as no one had come for Edet, they would all go at the ebb tide to feed, and leave no one in charge of the house. When they returned they found Edet still there, and everything as they had left it, as Ininen had not gone that day.
Three days afterwards they all went away again, and this time went a long way off, and did not return quickly. When Ininen saw that the tide was going down he changed himself into an alligator, and swam to the young alligators' home, where he found Edet chained to a post. He then found an axe and cut the post, releasing the boy. But Edet, having been in the water so long, was deaf and dumb. He then found several loin cloths which had been left behind by the young alligators, so he gathered them together and took them away to show to the king, and Ininen left the place, taking Edet with him.
He then called the mother to see her son, but when she came the boy could only look at her, and could not speak. The mother embraced her boy, but be took no notice, as he did not seem capable of understanding anything, but sat down quietly. Then the Ju Ju man told Edet's mother that be would cure her son in a few days, so be made several Ju Jus, and gave her son medicine, and after a time the boy recovered his speech and became sensible again.
Then Edet's mother put on a mourning cloth, and pretended that her son was dead, and did not tell the people he had come back to her. When the young alligators returned, they found that Edet was gone, and that some one had taken their loin cloths. They were therefore much afraid, and made inquiries if Edet had been seen, but they could hear nothing about him, as he was hidden in a farm, and the mother continued to wear her mourning cloth in order to deceive them.
Nothing happened for six months, and they had quite forgotten all about the matter. Affiong, the mother, then went to the chiefs of the town, and asked them to hold a large meeting of all the people, both young and old, at the palaver house, so that her late husband's property might be divided up in accordance with the native custom, as her son had been killed by the alligators.
The next day the chiefs called all the people together, but the mother in the early morning took her son to a small room at the back of the palaver house, and left him there with the seven loin cloths which the Ju Ju man had taken from the alligators' home. When the chiefs and all the people were seated, Affiong stood up and addressed them, saying-
"Chiefs and young men of my town, eight years ago my husband was a fine young man. He married me, and we lived together for many years without having any children. At last I had a son, but my husband died a few months afterwards. I brought my boy up carefully, but as he was a good drummer and dancer the young men were jealous, and had him caught by the alligators. Is there any one present who can tell me what my son would have become if he had lived?" She then asked them what they thought of the alligator society, which had killed so many young men.
The chiefs, who had lost a lot of slaves, told her that if she could produce evidence against any members of the society they would destroy it at once. She then called upon Ininen to appear with her son Edet. He came out from the room leading Edet by the hand, and placed the bundle of loin cloths before the chiefs.
The young men were very much surprised when they saw Edet, and wanted to leave the palaver house; but when they stood up to go the chiefs told them to sit down at once, or they would receive three hundred lashes. They then sat down, and the Ju Ju man explained how he had gone to the alligators' home, and had brought Edet back to his mother. He also said that he had found the seven loin cloths in the house, but he did not wish to say anything about them, as the owners of some of the cloths were sons of the chiefs.
The chiefs, who were anxious to stop the bad society, told him, however, to speak at once and tell them everything. Then he undid the bundle and took the cloths out one by one, at the same time calling upon the owners to come and take them. When they came to take their cloths, they were told to remain where they were; and they were then told to name their company. The seven young men then gave the names of all the members of their society, thirty-two in all. These men were all placed in a line, and the chiefs then passed sentence, which was that they should all be killed the next morning on the beach. So they were then all tied together to posts, and seven men were placed as a. guard over them. They made fires and beat drums all the night.
Early in the morning, at about 4 A.M., the big wooden drum was placed on the roof of the palaver house, and beaten to celebrate the death of the evildoers, which was the custom in those days.
The boys were then unfastened from the posts, and had their hands tied behind their backs, and were marched down to the beach. When they arrived there, the head chief stood up and addressed the people. "This is a small town of which I am chief, and I am determined to stop this bad custom, as so many men have been killed." He then told a man who had a sharp matchet to cut off one man's head. He then told another man who had a sharp knife to skin another young man alive. A third man who had a heavy stick was ordered to beat another to death, and so the chief went on and killed all the thirty-two young men in the most horrible ways he could think of. Some of them were tied to posts in the river, and left there until the tide came up and drowned them. Others were flogged to death.
After they had all been killed, for many years no one was killed by alligators, but some little time afterwards on the road between the beach and the town the land fell in, making a very large and deep hole, which was said to be the home of the alligators, and the people have ever since tried to fill it up, but have never yet been able to do so.

A long time ago, in the days of King Adam of Calabar, the king wanted to know if there was any animal or bird which was capable of enduring hunger for a long period. When he found one the king said he would make him a chief of his tribe.
The 'Nsasak bird is very small, having a shining breast of green and red; he also has blue and yellow feathers and red round the neck, and his chief food consists of ripe palm nuts. The Odudu bird, on the other hand, is much larger, about the size of a magpie, with plenty of feathers, but a very thin body; he has a long tail, and his colouring is black and brown with a cream-coloured breast. He lives chiefly on grasshoppers, and is also very fond of crickets, which make a noise at night.
Both the 'Nsasak bird and the Odudu were great friends, and used to live together. They both made up their minds that they would go before the king and try to be made chiefs, but the Odudu bird was quite confident that he would win, as he was so much bigger than the 'Nsasak bird. He therefore offered to starve for seven days.
The king then told them both to build houses which he would inspect, and then he would have them fastened up, and the one who could remain the longest without eating would be made the chief.
They both then built their houses, but the 'Nsasak bird, who was very cunning, thought that he could not possibly live for seven days without eating anything. He therefore made a tiny hole in the wall (being very small himself), which he covered up so that the king would not notice it on his inspection. The king then came and looked carefully over both houses, but failed to detect the little hole in the 'Nsasak bird's house, as it had been hidden so carefully. He therefore declared that both houses were safe, and then ordered the two birds to go inside their respective houses, and the doors were carefully fastened on the outside.
Every morning at dawn the 'Nsasak bird used to escape through the small opening he had left high up in the wall, and fly away a long distance and enjoy himself all day, taking care, however, that none of the people on the farms should see him. Then when the sun went down he would fly back to his little house and creep through the hole in the wall, closing it carefully after him. When he was safely inside he would call out to his friend the Odudu and ask him if he felt hungry, and told him that he must bear it well if he wanted to win, as he, the 'Nsasak bird, was very fit, and could go on for a long time.
For several days this went on, the voice of the Odudu bird growing weaker and weaker every night, until at last he could no longer reply. Then the little bird knew that his friend must be dead. He was very sorry, but could not report the matter, as he was supposed to be confined inside his house.
When the seven days had expired the king came and had both the doors of the houses opened. The 'Nsasak bird at once flew out, and, perching on a branch of a tree which grew near, sang most merrily; but the Odudu bird was found to be quite dead, and there was very little left of him, as the ants had eaten most of his body, leaving only the feathers and bones on the floor.
The king therefore at once appointed the 'Nsasak bird to be the head chief of all the small birds, and in the Ibibio country even to the present time the small boys who have bows and arrows are presented with a prize, which sometimes takes the shape of a female goat, if they manage to shoot a 'Nsasak bird, as the 'Nsasak bird is the king of the small birds, and most difficult to shoot on account of his wiliness and his small size.

Old Town, Calabar, once had a king called Essiya, who, like most of the Calabar kings in the olden days, was rich and powerful; but although he was so wealthy, he did not possess many slaves. He therefore used to call upon the animals and birds to help his people with their work. In order to get the work done quickly and well, he determined to appoint head chiefs of all the different species. The elephant he appointed king of the beasts of the forest, and the hippopotamus king of the water animals, until at last it came to the turn of the birds to have their king elected.
Essiya thought for some time which would be the best way to make a good choice, but could not make up his mind, as there were so many different birds who all considered they had claims. There was the hawk with his swift flight, and of hawks there were several species. There were the herons to be considered, and the big spur-winged geese, the hornbill or toucan tribe, and the game birds, such as guinea-fowl, the partridge, and the bustards. Then again, of course, there were all the big crane tribe, who walked about the sandbanks in the dry season, but who disappeared when the river rose, and the big black-and-white fishing eagles. When the king thought of the plover tribe, the sea-birds, including the pelicans, the doves, and the numerous shy birds who live in the forest, all of whom sent in claims, he got so confused, that he decided to have a trial by ordeal of combat, and sent word round the whole country for all the birds to meet the next day and fight it out between themselves, and that the winner should be known as the king bird ever afterwards.
The following morning many thousands of birds came, and there was much screeching and flapping of wings. The hawk tribe soon drove all the small birds away, and harassed the big waders so much, that they very shortly disappeared, followed by the geese, who made much noise, and winged away in a straight line, as if they were playing "Follow my leader." The big forest birds who liked to lead a secluded life very soon got tired of all the noise and bustle, and after a few croaks and other weird noises went home. The game birds had no chance and hid in the bush, so that very soon the only birds left were the hawks and the big black-and-white fishing eagle, who was perched on a tree calmly watching everything. The scavenger hawks were too gorged and lazy to take much interest in the proceedings, and were quietly ignored by the fighting tribe, who were very busy circling and swooping on one another, with much whistling going on. Higher and higher they went, until they disappeared out of sight. Then a few would return to earth, some of them badly torn and with many feathers missing. At last the fishing eagle said--
"When you have quite finished with this foolishness please tell me, and if any of you fancy yourselves at all, come to me, and I will settle your chances of being elected head chief once and for all;" but when they saw his terrible beak and cruel claws, knowing his great strength and ferocity, they stopped fighting between themselves, and acknowledged the fishing eagle to be their master.
Essiya then declared that Ituen, which was the name of the fishing eagle, was the head chief of all the birds, and should thenceforward be known as the king bird.
From that time to the present day, whenever the young men of the country go to fight they always wear three of the long black-and-white feathers of the king bird in their hair, one on each side and one in the middle, as they are believed to impart much courage and skill to the wearer; and if a young man is not possessed of any of these feathers when he goes out to fight, he is looked upon as a very small boy indeed.

In the time that all animals still lived together, there once lived a spider called Ananse. He lived in a village with his relatives and all kinds of other animals: hyena, porcupine, squirrel, guineafowl, the chameleon, the warthog and many, many more…
Ananse was one of the village elders, and one day he summoned all his friends and relations to discuss how they could all do more to help each other. Since they were all farmers, they decided it would be a good idea if they would all go to help one individual each day to plough, weed, harvest, whatever needed doing in the fields or around the house. For example, on Monday, they would start at Ananse's uncle's farm to help, on Tuesday it would be his grandfather and on Wednesday it would be his nephew's turn. Ananse put himself in charge of this program and he saw to it that everyone joined in and helped out. After a month or so or so, he was having a quiet sit down in front of his house, and he started thinking.
"You know, he said to himself, I think I can see a way to benefit from this arrangement. I could pretend to be really ill, so I can't help out with the others, and by the time I'm well again, all the work on my farm will be done!"
So the next morning, Ananse stayed in his bed, and when his nephew came to call on him told him: "Oo oo yoo, my dear nephew, this body of mine is really sick today, I'm afraid I can't join you today". Ananse's nephew told the others that his uncle was sick. They were all very concerned, and decided that the next day, they would all go and help out at Ananse's farm. This went on for several weeks, and Ananse's condition got no better.
One or two people started to whisper: "It's all very well us helping out on Ananse's farm, when is he going to give us a hand?" Ananse heard the complaints, and realized that he wouldn't be able to pretend for much longer. He decided he would have to do something to make everybody believe that he was really very sick. The next day he called some of his relatives together and said to them: "This illness of mine has been going on for some time, and it doesn't look as if I'm getting any better. In fact I feel worse every day. In fact I think I'm going to die". Some of his relatives protested, "No, no, uncle, you won't die!" "No, no, my brother, I will call on the medicine man and get you some herbs."
But Ananse told them he was getting weaker all the time, and started making his funeral arrangements.
"When I die, he said, you should bury me on my brother Kwami's farm. I have always loved his yams, and I would like to be buried next to them".
Kwami agreed that his brother could be buried there; after all it's very difficult not to grant a dying man his last wish. Ananse continued giving his instructions: they should dig a nice big hole, and line the walls with cloth, so that his spirit would be comfortable. They should put pots and pans and cooking utensils in the grave, so that his spirit would be able to prepare food for himself. Ananse's relations set to work digging the grave, while Ananse himself pretended that his condition was getting worse all the time.
Soon he learnt that the grave was finished, so the next time he saw someone approaching his house, he pretended to be dead. They tried to wake him, but Ananse wouldn't wake up, so they decided that he must indeed be dead. The next day they took his body and laid it in the grave, which had indeed been prepared they way Ananse had instructed. There were pots and pans and cooking utensils. That same night, Ananse climbed out of the grave and started collecting yams from the field, which he hid in his tomb. He cooked some of them. He made fufu with some of them. When daylight approached, Ananse hid in his tomb and slept. The next night he collected more yams, and feasted again. This carried on for one month. Eventually Kwami noticed that somebody had been stealing his yams. He thought long and hard, who could have done this to him? Normally he would have suspected Ananse, because he knew what his cunning brother was like, but he was dead, and he just couldn't think who else could be doing this to him.
Kwami decided to set a trap. He went to see the carpenter, and got some sturdy wooden poles, which he took back to his farm, where he poured tar all over them, and placed them strategically around his field, like scarecrows. Except these scarecrows weren't meant scare, but to trap.
Kwami was sure that the thief, whoever he was, would either touch one of the poles, and get tar all over himself, or leave a mark of some kind by which he could be identified.
That night when Ananse came out of his tomb to help himself to a few more of his brother's yams he immediately spotted a figure standing in the middle of the field.
"Oh Oh, he thought, somebody's watching me!"
But he noticed the figure just stood there, not moving at all. His curiosity got the better of him, and he slowly crept up to the figure. As the pole didn't stand very tall, Ananse figured it must be a young boy. He decided to play a trick on the child, he crept up to it, and said to it: "I've just seen your mother out looking for you. She said you have to come home to have your dinner".
But there was no reaction from the scarecrow.
Ananse repeated: "Your mother has been looking for you! Your dinner is waiting for you!"
But there was still no reaction. Ananse got quite annoyed at the child's insolence. "Look, I'm talking to you, you vagabond! Why don't you answer me?"
Still no reply, and Ananse got even more annoyed. "Do you want me to give you a slap? Very well, I'll slap you, and then we'll see what happens". With that Ananse gave the scarecrow a big slap, and his hand got stuck in the tar. He pulled, but he couldn't get loose.
"Let go of me, you rascal, he shouted. Let go of this hand!"
He screamed at the wooden pole to let go of his hand, "Let go of me or I'll slap you again!", and he slapped with his free hand. And immediately that one got stuck in the tar as well. Ananse got more and more agitated and angry.
"I'll give you a good kicking, if you don't let go of me!" He kicked the scarecrow with his left foot, and that got stuck. He kicked again with his right foot, and that got stuck as well. Ananse was now well and truly stuck to the scarecrow, he tried pulling as hard as he could, but there was no way he was going to pull himself free. In the end he was so exhausted he had to give up, and cried himself to sleep.
As soon as the sun was up, Ananse's brother Kwami came strolling into his field, eager to see if his plan had worked. He looked around carefully and saw that no more of his yams had been stolen, so that part of the plan had worked. Smiling to himself, he went round to inspect the tarred poles, when lo and behold he saw the figure of a spider attached to it. As he hurried closer he recognized his brother, Ananse.
Kwami exclaimed: "Ananse! Ananse! What are you doing here, you are supposed to be dead!"
Coolly, Ananse replied: "Ananse is indeed dead, it is his ghost you are looking at!"
You may have gathered by now that Kwami was rather naïve, and he was also very superstitious, so when he heard these words, he really believed this was a ghost addressing him. He became very scared and ran away! He ran straight back to the village, calling out to everybody he passed: "Ananse's ghost! I've just seen Ananse's ghost!" People gathered round him, wanting to know more. Kwami told them he'd seen Ananse's ghost, stuck to a pole he'd put up on his farm. Of course the villagers all wanted to see this, so they all started running to Kwami's farm. There they saw for themselves the figure of Ananse still glued to the pole.
"What are you doing here, they asked, You're supposed to be dead. We buried you not so long ago!"
"You're looking at my ghost!" wailed Ananse, who by now was getting very uncomfortable. The villagers too were scared, and they were about to run away, when Ananse cried out: 'stop, stop! Why are you running away? I'm your relation, aren't I? There's no need to be so scared! And anyway, I need your help! I need help!"
One of the braver men came a little closer, and asked: "What kind of help do you need, Ananse brother?"
Ananse replied: "I'm stuck to this tarred pole, can't you see? I need help to pull me free!"
Two or three of them worked up enough courage to approach, and started pulling at him. Ananse was giving them instructions: "Pull here, a little more on this side, a little harder here!"
But one of the villagers who'd been pulling at Ananse's leg, stood back and scratched his head. "Wait a minute, he said. This is not a ghost! This is the real Ananse. He's not dead at all!"
They all stopped pulling and heaving. "Yea, said another, how can a ghost be instructing us to pull here and pull there?" They started hitting him with sticks, throwing mud at him and raining insults on him. After a while Kwami took pity on his brother, and asked them to stop. They pulled him loose, and told him to leave the village, and never to show his face again. After Ananse was banned all his family members were so ashamed that they too decided to leave the village, and that's to this day, whenever you see a spider it is always trying to hide somewhere, in a crack in the floor or a dark corner, because it is still ashamed of what its ancestor Ananse got up to.

There was a time when animals and people lived on the earth harmoniously side by side. Each respected the other, and they went out of their way to be friendly and useful to each other.
The elephant being the King of the animals decided one day that there should be a King of the Rivers and Marshes. He thought it would be useful to have somebody responsible for alerting people to the coming of the first rains, so that they would have time to get ready and start preparing their tools and seeds.
The king of the animals sent out his trusted town cryer, the cockerel, with a message that any animal who wished to be considered should attend the King's court the following morning. The cockerel dutifully made his way all round the animal village, passing the King's messages to all and sundry. The next morning the elephant came into his court yard after having partaken of his breakfast, and found a number of candidates for the post had gathered there. The cat was there, and the monkey. Toad and frog stood side by side, flamingo was there and the crab had also turned up.
The elephant inspected each one of the candidates, and started weighing up their qualities for the position.
To the cat he said: "Cat, you don't even like water. You run away and hide at the first sight of rain. How can I make you the king of Rivers and Marshes?" So the cat was dismissed.
To the monkey he said: "Monkey, I am very happy to see you here, but you are so playful and forgetful, I am afraid you might forget your duties because you always put playing first. I can't consider you for the position". So monkey was dismissed.
To the flamingo he said: "Flamingo, you would be very good for the post, you love being in the river, but I am afraid your voice just is not loud enough. Nobody would hear you! I can't make you the king of rivers and marshes." So flamingo was dismissed.
To the Crab he said: "My dear Crab. How could I make you the King?. You don't even have a head! Where would we put your crown? You can't be the king of the Rivers and Marshes, I'm afraid." So crab was dismissed.
That just left toad and frog. The elephant scratched his head with his trunk, "Fellows", he said, "I can't really make up my mind between the two of you. I am sure you would both be very good at the job, you both have wonderful voices. I just can't choose". Then the cockerel suggested there could be a race to decide the issue. The king agreed immediately. "Let there be a race", he proclaimed. "We will start here in the court yard, and the first to get to the river bank will be crowned king of the Rivers and Marshes!"
And so the race was organised. The king, followed by a host of animals, made his way to the river bank so he could see with his own eyes who the winner would be. The cockerel remained in the court yard with the two contestants, so that he could give the starting signal. When all was ready and in place, the cockerel let out a might screech, and toad and frog were off. They jumped and double jumped and triple jumped as fast and as long as they could. Toad was actually the quickest, and he had built up a small lead when suddenly he came to a halt. There in front of him was a wide and deep ditch. Toad could not remember it being there before, it must have been created during the last storm. Toad was not at all sure that he would be able to jump across. In the meantime frog had caught up with him, and also stopped. "Harrooh", he exclaimed, "a little ditch, that's nothing for me!" He took a mighty jump, using all the strength he had in his formidable hind legs, and comfortably made it to the other side. Toad knew he had to get across, so he took a deep breath, and used all his strength to jump, but poor toad, he just did not make it. He hit the side of the ditch, and tumbled all the way down to the bottom.
So Frog was the first one to reach the river bank and won the race. The elephant congratulated him, and he was duly crowned king of the Rivers and marshes. At his coronation, the king of all the animals, elephant, made a big speech. "Frog", he said, "now that you are the King of the rivers and Marshes, your first duty is to announce the coming of the first rains, so that all the farmers can get ready to start doing their important work. You shall do this by singing you Croo Croo song as loud as you possibly can, and for as long as it takes to get the message to everybody!"
That is the reason why to this day, when people hear the frog's song, they are very happy, because they know that the dry season is over and the rain they need to grow their crops is on its way.

The grass shrivelled up and turned a pale grey. Rivers and pools dried up. All day long animals scurried around looking for food and finding nothing. Mr Tortoise was getting desperate. Every day he woke up to the sound of his wife and children crying. One day, while he was wandering the countryside looking for food he knew he wouldn't find, he noticed a flock of birds flying overhead and disappearing on the other side of the mountain range. The next day, he saw more birds flying in that direction and disappearing over the mountain range. And again the next day. It occurred to him they might be onto something, and he tried to attract their attention. He shouted, he screamed, he danced, he jumped up and down, he shouted while jumping up and down, he ran in circles and waved a stick. None of the birds paid any attention to him; none even slowed down.
Many animals would have given up, but not Mr Tortoise. He decided he would compose a song to the vulture; he thought the vulture might just be vain enough to stop and listen. That night he finished composing the song and the next morning positioned himself in a nice open spot by the side of a field. When he saw the first birds in the sky he started to sing his song:
The vulture is so good
The vulture is so wise
Everyone admires him
As he flies through the skie-ie-ie-ie-ies
The vulture heard snatches of the song, and he was intrigued, so he came down to land and strode over majestically to where Mr Tortoise was sitting. When Mr Tortoise saw vulture approaching, he sang again:
The vulture is so good
The vulture is so wise
Everyone admires him
As he flies through the skie-ie-ie-ie-ies
Aaaah, the vulture exclaimed, what a beautiful voice! What enticing music! Mr Tortoise thanked him profusely for his praise, then asked very politely if he could ask a favour of Mr Vulture. Certainly, the vulture beamed, go ahead my lyrical friend!
Tortoise explained that because of the drought, there was no food left where they were living, if Mr Vulture could only give him a lift to the other side of the mountain, so that he could look after his family. Vulture readily agreed to help his new friend. He raised himself and flapped his wings. Just hang on to my waist, Mr Tortoise, and we'll be there in no time at all.
Mr Tortoise grabbed hold of Vulture's scraggy feathers, Vulture flapped his giant wings, took a few great strides, and up they went. And vulture had been quite right, it seemed to take hardly any time at all and they were floating over the mountains, and Tortoise could see a glimmer of green appearing below. A few more flaps of those giant wings, and they were landing in the middle of a truly amazing landscape. The place was covered in trees and bushes carrying every fruit imaginable, mangos, bananas, pears, oranges, apples, pineapple, papaya, plums, you name it, it grew here in abundance.
Tortoise walked around in a daze, he picked an apple here, tasted some mango there, found some blackberries on a small bush. The most remarkable thing was that apart from the birds who must have discovered this pleasure paradise flying over it, there seemed to be no other animals here at all! This set our Mr Tortoise thinking.
Now you may have realised already that Mr Tortoise was not just any old tortoise, but that he had a very good brain, and a great imagination. So, slowly but surely, he hatched a plan. The next morning he found a spot on the hillside which gave a good view of the orchard, he stood upright and started speaking in as loud a voice as he could muster:
Yo! Yo! All you birds, listen to me for a few moments! Yo! Yo! I have bad news for you all! I'm afraid you're all trespassing here on this land. This land belonged to my great great grandfather. When he died he gave it to my grandfather. And my grandfather left it to my daddy, and my daddy, well now, my daddy he gave it to me before he died.
There was consternation among the birds, they weren't sure how to take this news.
Then Mr Tortoise carried on: I'm going to count to three, and at the count of three, I want all of you to have left this place.
ONE!
Hey, Mr Tortoise, you're joking aren't you?
Is he joking?
No, man, he's not joking!
TWO!
Some of the birds started flying. We thought you were joking! We never intended to trespass, after all, we're all just law abiding citizens, you know. More and more birds flew off.
THREE!
Now they were all leaving. Mr Tortoise looked for his friend, Vulture. When he saw him, he ran up to him and called out: Heyo, Vulture, hold on, you're my friend aren't you, you can stay here with me.
After feasting on the fruit for several hours, Mr Tortoise had another idea. He really wanted to find out exactly what he had here. So he approached Vulture and said: Vulture, you're going to carry me high into the sky! Then I will know how big my own land is, and I will see how useful it will be.
Vulture replied: Yessirr! Hang on to my waist. So Mr Tortoise clung on to Vulture's waist, Vulture flapped his wings, gently at first, and up and up and up he went.
It was very breezy so high up in the sky, and Mr Tortoise was enjoying himself. Whoa, whoa, he shouted, this is wonderful, I'm enjoying this breeze, it's just beautiful!. Then, in his excitement he started scratching Vulture's armpits; that was not such a wise thing to do.
Please, screeched Vulture, I am ticklish, do-do-do-don't do that PLEEEEASE, Stop it, please, I'm sooooo ticklish!.
Unfortunately Tortoise wouldn't stop. In desperation Vulture shook his wings so violently that Mr Tortoise lost his grip. He went down and down and down and down and down, and there was nothing at all to stop him. It was Mr Tortoise's rather bad fortune to land in a place that was covered in hard jagged rocks, there was an enormous crashing sound when he made contact with he rocks. Cracks appeared all over the body of Mr Tortoise.
He tried to shout for help, but his voice only made a very small sound. Luckily for Mr Tortoise Vulture saw him lying there, his body all cracked up, and felt sorry for him. So Vulture decided to get the ambulance, and they managed to get him to a hospital. Because he was in such a bad way and looked as if he could die any minute there and then, Mr Tortoise was taken straight into the operating theatre and three doctors started work on him. They worked for hours on end, stitching, stitching, stitching all the cracks in his shell.
Eventually all the sores healed and he was discharged, but of course he was left with the scars, and that is why every time you see a tortoise you can still see the scars on the back of his shell.

Once upon a time there was a wedding in the sky. The bride and groom invited all the animals in the whole land. Those who had wings and could fly obviously would have no problem attending but those animals who lived on the ground would have a few problems getting there unless they could persuade a bird to take them on their back. Mr Tortoise really wanted to attend the wedding, he loved parties, but he had no idea how to get there. While he was mulling over this problem, a vulture landed near him, looking for scraps of food left behind by other animals.
The tortoise called out to the vulture, "Mr Vulture, I wonder if you are planning to attend the wedding next week?" The vulture confirmed that he had every intention of being there, if only because there would be lots of free food! Then the tortoise asked if Mr Vulture would consider giving him a lift. Vulture shook his head, "That might be a bit difficult", he said, "I can see by looking at you that you are not very light, Mr Tortoise. What would you be prepared to give me in return, if I were to agree to your request?"
Now tortoise had been saving up, and he had a large pile of cowrie shells in his lair. So he promised to pay vulture as many cowrie shells as he could carry. Vulture agreed. So it came about that on the day of the wedding, Vulture came round to where tortoise lived, and collected him. Tortoise clung onto vulture's back, and they arrived at the wedding in the sky without any mishaps. The wedding was a splendid feast and there were lots of different kinds of food to cater for all tastes. Vulture decided he would try some porridge, never having tasted this before, but found it very difficult to eat this with his beak. The porridge kept spilling, and some spilled on tortoise. Tortoise pretended to be very upset, and vulture pacified him by saying that he could keep his cowrie shells, and tortoise was very happy with this solution. Now he had got here completely free of charge.
Later, they were all drinking beer, and tortoise was getting a little careless. He was drinking a little more beer than usual at a party, and he started swaying about a bit. As a result, now tortoise spilt some beer on vulture's head, and it was vulture's turn to be offended. Tortoise again offered vulture as many cowrie shells as he could carry, but vulture just sulked off, he was not really interested in cowrie shells. Soon it was time for everybody to go home. The birds started flying away, including Mr Vulture. "Mr Vulture, wait for me!" called out tortoise, but vulture did not hear, and flew away. None of the other birds wanted to carry tortoise;
"You're too big for my back!"
"You're too heavy for me!"
"You're too drunk, Mr Tortoise, you'll only fall off!"
In the end, tortoise was left all by himself, and he realised the only way to get back to the ground would be to jump, and fall all the way down to earth. He knew he could not stay up here in the clouds! So he jumped, hoping that his landing would be soft, but he landed on some hard ground, and his shell broke into many pieces. In the morning his nephew and nieces came round, and stuck his shell together again, but now it showed many scars and cracks. And that is why every time you see a tortoise you can still see the scars on the back of his shell.

Monkey lived on the branches of an old mangrove tree, right on the spot where the land ends and the sea begins. He liked living here. There were lots of other animals to talk to and play with, most of them much smaller than he was, which he particularly liked because it made him feel safe and comfortable at home. The big hunters like the lion hardly ever ventured here because the ground was so soggy that their heavy paws would sink into the mud and they wouldn't be able to move fast enough to catch their prey. There were birds of all shapes and sizes, some that flew and some that could only run along the ground, like the guinea fowl; and the fish! He loved talking to the fish, listening to their stories of life under water. In fact his best friend was Shamus the Shark.
Every evening when the sun was about to go down, Shamus would wind his way through the roots of the mangroves and look for Monkey. Monkey was always expecting his friend, and he'd find a nice cosy branch that hung close to the water's surface to sit on while he waited for his friend. The first thing he usually saw was the triangular tip of Shamus's fin sticking up above the water.
Monkey would jump up and down on his branch, and wave and shout. "Over here, Shamus, I'm over here, Uh Uh Ugh Ugh Un Ugh. Shamus would roll over a few times in the shallow water while he swam the last few yards, and lift his enormous jaws out of the water to greet Monkey: "Yo, Monkey my man, how's life in the trees?"
"Toil and toil and toil, my salty friend", Monkey would joke.
Then they would fill each other in on all the news from among the mangrove trees and under the deep blue sea. Monkey would talk about all the mischief he'd got up to that day, how he chased the birds, or caught a ride on Uncle Turtle's back, or hid from the preying eyes of a hovering hawk. Shamus would tell him about all the beautiful creatures at the bottom of the sea, the squids with their trailing tentacles catching glimpses of light from the surface, the sea anemones that were always waving at passers by.
But Shamus's favourite subject by far was food!
He loved to talk about delicate textures and flavours of the different species of fish he devoured on a daily basis. And he was always curious to know what Monkey's favourite dish was. To be honest, monkey didn't think that much about food. He was a strict vegetarian and usually dined on mangrove leaves. But he did remember once a long time ago he did eat something rather special. That was when his cousin from Zanzibar had paid him a visit. He'd brought along a large bag stuffed to the rim with palm hearts. And they'd been delicious! So Succulent! So chewy! So tangy and so sweet! So utterly Yummy!! They'd feasted for days on end. So whenever Shamus asked him about his favourite food, Monkey would lie back on his branch, rub his tummy and tell the tale of eating palm hearts for three whole days and nights.
Then one day, not so long ago, Shamus turned up at the usual time, the setting sun painting the whole mangrove a glorious bright palm oil red. He seemed a little excited, as if he couldn't wait for their usual banter to pass so he could get down to business.
"Hey Monkey my man", he burst out, "GUESS WHAT?!? You know those palm hearts you're always going on about, yea, well, guess what? I just mentioned it to my wife, you know, a while ago now, just casually, in passing you know, the way you do, you know what I mean, and she just, and she only, you know what, she's got this friend, who's a bit of a merchant in the fine food business, you know, he can get hold of anything you like, just like that, you just mention it and he'll get it for you…………"
Monkey was nodding away through this monologue of Shark's, to be honest he was getting a bit bored and he wished Shamus would get to the point whatever it was. So he just nodded and smiled and made a few polite noises every now and then when Shamus happened to look his way. "Um, Uhm. Ya Ya, Great, ya, triffic, Groovy, Ugh, Ugh, Uhn Uhm".
Finally Shark got to the point. "Well! She got some!!!"
'she got a whole bag of these palm heart thingy-me-bobs. And she's inviting you to dinner! She's preparing a feast right now, as we speak! Do you wanna come?"
Monkey was so surprised, he didn't know what to say at first, and believe me, that doesn't happen very often with monkeys! "D'you wanna come? D'you wanna?"
"Well, Shamus, my salty mate, how we gonna do that? Where do you live?" Shamus pointed his pointy nose out towards the sea.
"That's what I thought," said Monkey. "How'm I gonna get there? I can't swim that far! Y'know, here in the mangrove I can just about get by, I paddle around a bit in this shallow water, that's OK, "cause I know it's not deep enough for me to drown. But out there…….."
But Shamus had obviously thought about this a great deal because he had a plan and he set out to explain it to Monkey. Monkey could sit on his, Shamus's back, and hold on to his fin, and he, Shamus, would stay right on top of the water, right on the surface, so Monkey wouldn't even hardly get wet at all. "What do you think? Shall we go? Let's go! My wife has done all this work, she's been in the kitchen all afternoon!"
Well, as you know, Monkeys are nothing if not adventurous and intrepid, not to mention foolhardy. So Monkey agreed to come and join the feast. He jumped from his branch and onto his salty friend's back, clinging on to the hard fin, and with a swoosh! of his strong tail and a "YIPPEE!" from his grinning mouth full of teeth, Shark set off.
This was really the strangest and weirdest and most wonderful and utterly frightening thing Monkey had ever done. He'd never been out to sea before and he was impressed by the huge waves that pushed them up and down, and the force behind them. Shark must be very strong indeed to swim through this lot! After they'd gone some way, Shark slowed down and lifted his head out of the water.
"You know, Monkey, my friend, there's something you should know. You see, even though my wife is preparing this wonderful feast for you, she herself is very sick."
Monkey sat up a bit from his position on Shark's back, so he could listen better. "Oh really", he managed to say, feeling very wet and very cold and really rather scared, "I'm sorry to hear that man. What's wrong with her? Anything I can do?"
"Actually", said Shark, looking rather sheepish, "there may be something you can do. You see, she went to see her doctor the other day, and he told her there was one thing that would improve her condition without fail and immeasurably enhance her chances of getting better, Surefire guarantee."
'so what's that?" asked Monkey.
Shark coughed and hesitated, then he said, softly, menacingly: "Well, the doc told her to get a hold of a monkey's heart and eat it raw!"
Monkey almost fell into the roaring sea. He looked around nervously. He didn't at all like what he was hearing! Not at all! Instinctively he tightened his grip on Shark's fin.
'so," Shark continued, making his voice sound eerily calm, "we were wondering, you know, if we give you the palm hearts, whether you'll give us your heart. Like an exchange", shark explained.
"Hey, Shark!" Monkey shouted, because there was a roaring in his ears, and he wasn't sure whether it was the sound of the sea or his heart pumping, 'sure! Of course, man, no problem at all! Whatsoever! Man! Are you my friend or what? I mean, what's a little bit of heart between friends!" Shark smiled. "Aaagh", he sighed, "Monkey, man I can't tell you how happy it makes me to hear you say those words. I tell you man, if you do this for me, I mean for my wife, anything, anytime, anywhere, anything at all you ever want at any time in the future, man, I'll get it for you or my name isn't Shark!"
"You know, Shark, my salty friend", Monkey said in a very small voice, "there's only one thing, though, you know, I wish you'd mentioned this before we set off, because you know, I left my heart at home! I left it in a very secret place in my tree where I always hide it!" Monkey almost stopped breathing while he waited for Shark to digest this information.
Shark Sputtered. He coughed. He gurgled. "You left it at home??" He grinned his crooked grin at its most crooked. Monkey knew he had to be very careful what he said right now. He knew he had to get this exactly right. He could feel his heart beating in his throat, and he was afraid it might just jump out right into Shark's open mouth. He hoped the thumping wouldn't make Shark suspicious.
"You see, my friend, it's like this. For a monkey like me, the heart is the most important thing, the most vital possession. If a monkey loses his heart, well, you might as well give up living right there and then! So you see, I'm always really, really, careful with it and make sure it's always in a safe place somewhere, so I can find it when I need it!"
"I see", grumbled Shark grimly, "I see, so what do we do now, Monkey, my man?"
"Well", said Monkey, hopefully, "we're not that far out yet, are we? We could race back, I'll jump up into my tree, get the heart, and we can be back here in what, ten, fifteen, minutes at the most! Let's hurry, let's not keep your wife waiting any longer than is strictly necessary."
Now Shark was in a real quandary. Was Monkey telling the truth or was he having him on? But of course, he didn't really have a choice. If he was not to arouse Monkey's suspicion he had to go along with him and pretend to believe him even if he wasn't at all sure that was the right thing to do. So he swooshed his tail, and turned his pointed nose back towards the land.
"OK, Monkey, my mate, let's hurry!" He swam as fast as he could, thinking that the quicker he got this done, the less time Monkey would have to change his mind.
They got back to the mangrove in less than five minutes, they'd hardly reached the first tree, and Shark had barely started to slow down, when Monkey got up and made an almighty leap from his friend's back towards the nearest branch, caught it, then swung up and over, and onto the next branch, and up and over again onto the next highest one, and higher and higher he swung and hurled himself until he was at the highest point in the highest tree in the middle of the mangrove. Then he stopped and looked down.
The sun had gone down completely now and the full moon shone a pale greyish yellow light over the mangrove. Below him Monkey could see the silver dorsal fin of Shark against the black water, his jaws snapping at the cool night air.
"Monkey, Monkey, where are you? You promised, your heart? Where is it, where have you hidden it? Where is it then? Monkey, your heart!"
Monkey couldn't help himself. Suddenly all the tension left him and he started jumping up and down. "Ugh Ugn Ugm Ugh Ugh Oh my friendly fiendish shark! I was almost done for, wasn't I? The only thing that saved me is that you are even more stupid than me!!"

Once upon a time there lived a hunter called Ajakasi. Many hunters lived in his village. Some hunters used guns, some used bows and arrows, others used sticks and cutlasses to do their hunting.
Ajakasi went on a hunting expedition early one morning. He went deep into the bush. He wondered around all day long, but the bush seemed deserted, and by late afternoon he had not even seen a bird. He was terribly tired and hungry. He decided to go back home. Just as he was about to turn back, he heard an unusual sound coming from somewhere in the distance. He listened carefully, thinking he finally got lucky; he hard peeap peeap peeap uuwuurgh oowuurgh uuuwuurgh.
He said to himself, goodness, that sounds like a big animal, maybe even a lion, I'll sneak up carefully and see if I can find it. He headed in the direction from which the sound was coming, and soon he came upon a clearing in the forest, and right there in the middle of the clearing was a big hole. He approached gingerly, and craned his neck so as to be able to see inside the pit, and what did he see?
He saw a lion.
Instinctively he jumped back, then after collecting his nerves, he approached the hole again, and craned his neck so as to be able to see inside the pit; then he saw a snake in the same pit! And he saw a man, crouching in one of the corners. Ajakasi couldn't help but wonder what was happening down there, why was the lion not eating the man?
Then he also saw a rat! He couldn't believe is eyes, so there was a lion down there, and a huge snake, and a man and a rat!
The lion was he first to spot Ajakasi. Please Mr Hunter, get me out of this pit! I"m terribly hungry! Ajakasi shook his head, and with a trembling voice, said: I'm really sorry Mr Lion, but I can't do that! A hungry lion? How can I pull you out? As soon as I get you up here you're going to have me for your lunch!
The lion growled in response. Don't you think I could have eaten this man here, he asked. Or the snake, or the rat? We all agreed not to eat each other but to stick together, so that we might all get out of here. I guarantee that if you help us you will be safe
The man in the pit joined in: Please Mr Hunter, believe us, the lion is telling the truth, please get us out of here, please help us. The snake joined in, hissing, and the rat was squeaking. The hunter was touched.
All right, he said, all right, I'll help you. Just hold on while I find something. He went into the trees, and found the longest possible rope, he tied one end to the nearest tall tree, and pulled it hard to test it. When he was satisfied that it would be strong enough to pull all those creatures out of the pit. He threw the loose end into the hole. And who was the first to come out? Of course, the lion, the snake came out next, and then the rat and finally the man crawled to the surface. The lion gave Ajakasi a heavy handshake. Ouch, screamed Ajakasi, you've hurt me! That was painful! Is that how you're going to thank me?
No, no, no, no, said the lion, Thank you very much indeed, Mr Hunter, I will see you again. With that the lion disappeared into the jungle. The snake thanked him too, and slithered away. The man thanked him, and ran off.
The rat was the last to thank him; I won't forget your kindness, he said before scurrying off in the undergrowth.
Ajakasi was left all by himself; it was getting dark and he remembered how hungry he was, so he too set off back to his hut in the village.
Several days later, very early in the morning, even before the sun had crawled over the horizon, he heard somebody knocking loudly on his door.
Bhoumm Bhoumm Bhoumm! Who is there, asked Ajakasi. But there was no reply. He opened the door, and there stood the lion. Ajakasi was scared to the marrow, and almost threw the door shut again, but the lion raised a paw in greeting. Mr Lion, sighed Ajakasi, you really scared me there! I'm sorry about that, said the lion, I suppose that can't be helped. I can't very well turn up here in broad daylight, can I now? Ajakasi had to agree. Well then, said the lion, you did something wonderful for me the other day, you were very brave to help the four of us get out of that pit. So I have come to thank you, just come over here. The lion stood back and Ajakasi stepped outside. There, in front of his house he found a huge pile of wild meat. All for you, said the lion, and wandered off.
Ajakasi was very excited. He sat to work immediately cleaning the meat and cutting it up. He kept some in his hut and took the rest to the city to sell. He got a lot of money for it! A few more days went by, when Ajakasi was woken again by the same noise coming from his door. He opened the door carefully, and found the lion there again. The lion directed him to the usual spot, and there was an even bigger pile of meat! Again, Ajakasi cleaned the meat, cut it up and took it to the market to sell. He got even more money. The remarkable thing was that the lion kept coming back every three or four days to bring more meat. Ajakasi became a very rich man. He could pay his children's school fees, he built a new house, he bought new clothes for himself and all his family members He was turning into a very happy man.
Then one day, he noticed a hole in the roof of his new house. Oooh, what is this? He went to inspect and to his surprise he saw a rat peeping through the hole. Aaaii, said Ajakasi, who are you, and what are you doing to my roof, making holes in it? The rat said: Don't you remember me? I'm the rat you rescued from the pit in the jungle, some time ago now. If it hadn't been for you coming along I would surely have ended up as supper for the lion or the snake! I've come to bring you something to thank you, just wait there a minute.
Ajakasi was left speechless, he watched as the rat disappeared, but came back presently, lugging an enormous sack, which he dropped through the hole at Ajakasi's feet. Take these things, the rat said, as a token of my appreciation , and then he disappeared as quickly as he had come. Ajakasi, tugged at the sack, and opened it.
When he saw what was inside he almost fainted. The sack was filled with gold, diamonds, emeralds and other precious stones and minerals
Now Ajakasi was almost the wealthiest man in the whole village. Only the chief was richer. It so happened that a few months later thieves broke into the chief's compound while he was away on a trip. They took everything that had any value. When he returned the chief was soooo sad, he wept for days on end. People came from all over the district to bring him presents and to console him. Ajakasi also went to see him and took some pieces of gold. One day the man who was rescued from the pit by Ajakasi passed through the village and called at the chief's compound. He asked to see the chief, saying that he had some information about the theft. The chief had him ushered into his private quarters immediately, he was still very sad and tearful, and asked his visitor to tell him everything he knew without stalling. Don't cry again, nana, the man started, I know who it was who stole all your jewels and your rich kente cloths. Who is that man? The chief shouted. Where is he?
Don't worry, said the visitor, he is here in the village, it is the hunter Ajakasi.
The chief fell down on his chair. Ajakasi? I don't believe it, he is such a good man!
The man raised his hand up. Don't you remember, Oh great chief, Ajakasi was just a poor wretched hunter, but look at him now, he has built a new house, almost as big as your own, he has bought new clothes for himself and all his family, he pays his children's school fees, and he never goes out hunting any more, yet he always has plenty of meat on his table. How is he able to do all that…? He is surely the one who stole all your things.
The chief was now very angry. He called some of his soldiers and commanded them to arrest Ajakasi and bring the thief before him immediately. This was done. The soldiers went to Ajakasi's house, tied him up and brought him before the chief. He was mercilessly beaten. He tried to explain how it was that he had come by his riches, but when he mentioned the lion bringing him meat, the soldiers just beat him more, and when he mentioned the rat bringing him gold and precious metals in a sack, the chief shouted: Enough! Tie him to the stocks, and tomorrow morning we will execute him!
So, Ajakasi was put in the stocks and condemned to death as punishment for a crime he didn't commit. He realized he would be executed the next morning and there was nothing he could do about it. After darkness had fallen and the last of the village people had gone home, he felt a strange sensation around his ankles. What is this, he wondered, what is going on now? He heard the hissing of a snake, and when he looked down he saw a large snake slithering on the ground in front of him.
I would normally be afraid of you, said Ajakasi, but as I'm going to die anyway tomorrow, I'm not really worried. Well, said the snake, you're right not to be worried. You probably don't remember me, but I am the snake you rescued from that pit in the jungle all those weeks ago now. I have come to thank you for what you did.
Oh. It was nothing really, said Ajakasi, but I'm afraid it's a little bit late. I'm about to be executed! I have been accused of a crime I never committed.
We'll see about that, said the snake. I have a plan. I have some medicine here, which I'll hide under your belt. I understand the king has a very beautiful daughter. That's right, confirmed Ajakasi, she is his only child. Even better, said the snake. I am going to give her a little bite, and poison her. She will surely die, but the medicine in the bottle is an antidote, the only thing that will cure my bite. When you save the life of the king's only child, he will be forever in your debt, and he surely will not want to kill you any more! With that the snake slithered towards the chief' living quarters.
Be careful, don't get caught! whispered the hunter.
As the sun sent its first rays over the eastern wall of the compound, Ajakasi heard some screams coming from the chief's living quarters. Women were wailing. Ouwooaagh! The king's only daughter! Owowowow! A snake has bitten her! Owowowow! The snake has run away! Owowowowo! Why is this happening?! Owowowow!
People were running towards the house.
Ajakasi shouted at them: I can bring this girl back to life! A soldier came up to Ajakasi, and shouted at him: Shut up, you're only a common thief!
Ajakasi pleaded with him: I am sincere, I can really bring the girl back to life, go and tell the chief! The soldier spat at him, and told him again to keep quiet. But as he was running to the chief's house, the soldier thought to himself: what if the condemned man was telling the truth? The chief would be grateful to him and he would surely be rewarded. He had nothing to loose by telling the chief.
At first, when the chief was told that Ajakasi could bring his daughter back to life, he didn't want to know. That man is only trying to postpone his execution, he thought. But when he looked at the body of his dead daughter, and saw his distraught wife, he changed his mind. After all, there was nothing to be lost, and everything to be gained. You never know what secrets these hunters learn in the jungle. So he ordered his soldiers to cut Ajakasi loose and bring the man to him.
When Ajakasi got to the dead girl's bedside, he asked for a bowl and some water. He poured in the medicine that the snake had given him, and stirred it with his fingers until it was well mixed into a smooth sauce. This he mopped up with a piece of plain cotton cloth, and he squeezed the liquid into the dead girl's nostrils. The chief and his wife and all the soldiers were watching his every move. Ajakasi knew very well that if the girl didn't revive he would be dead on the spot.
But the girl twitched her nose. Itchee! Itchee!
She sneezed! The chief shouted: She sneezed! Slowly the girl opened her eyes, and the chief jumped up and down for joy. The girl's mother rushed to her side and the soldiers started to dance. The girl spoke to her mother: mommy, where am I? I'm hungry, can you get me some fufu?
Ah, the chief and his wife were so excited! A servant brought in some fufu with a wonderful soup, and the girl ate everything.
Ajakasi was carried shoulder high all around the village. When things quietened down a little the chief sent for him.
Ajakasi, the chief addressed him, you have done me a great service, the greatest possible service, so I am going to save your life. But you must tell me, honestly and without lying, why did you have to steal all my property.
Ajakasi replied: O my great chief, I really didn't steal your property, as I've been trying to tell everyone. He then told the chief his remarkable story, what had happened in the jungle, how he found the lion, the snake, the rat and the man in the pit and how he got them out. How the lion thanked him by bringing him meat, which he sold at a great profit; how the rat brought him gold and diamonds and other precious minerals, some of which he sold and got even more money for.
But his fellow human being thanked him by getting him into trouble. If it had not been for the snake coming to his rescue at the last minute, he would not be standing here to tell his tale.
The king was astonished by the tale. He apologized to Ajakasi for not believing him and he ordered all his possessions to be restored to him. To show the chief he did not harbour any grudges, Ajakasi organized a big feast, which went on long into the night.

This version of the old story, which we all know in the version made famous by Aesop, was told to me in London by Zarah, a refugee from Somalia. Hare was a very vain creature. He was always going around putting others down, and boasting about his won exploits.
One day tortoise got really fed up. "We'll teach him a lesson", he said. He sat by the roadside and waited for hare to come racing by. He called out to him: "Hare! Where are you going in such a hurry. Stop and listen to my proposal, which might be of some benefit to you."
Hare turned round and approached tortoise. "What's this I hear", he said, "are you planning to give me some reward?"
"Indeed so", said tortoise. "We are going to have a race! If you can beat me you will be able to call yourself the fastest in the animal kingdom".
Hare fell over backwards laughing. "Beat you? That's hardly a challenge. I could beat you in a race hopping on one leg!"
"We shall see", said tortoise, "Do you accept the challenge?"
"Of course I do", said hare, "It'll be a gas!" They determined the course of the race. Then tortoise went and called together some of his cousins, and gave them instructions to be at certain places along the race course. The next morning hare and tortoise met at the starting point. They set off together, but hare immediately rushed off, leaving tortoise far behind. After a few minutes he rested to get some breath. Then he set off again. To his great amazement he spotted tortoise in front of him. How was that possible? He'd only stopped for a minute! He raced past him, and shouted: 'see if you can catch me again, shorty legs!" Within seconds he'd left tortoise far behind again. Hare got tired again, and decided to have another little rest. There was no way he was going to lose this race! After a short while he set off again, at great speed, and lo! There was tortoise in front of him again! That was impossible! How could that slowcoach have overtaken him again? He caught up with tortoise and looked at him. "Have you taken some kind of magic potion?" he asked. Tortoise didn't stop, he just said to hare: 'slow and steady, that's me!" Hare raced ahead. After a few minutes he looked back, there was no sign of tortoise and his self confidence returned. He stopped to have a nibble at a bush. He had a drink and a quick snooze to refresh himself, and then set off again, as fast as his strong legs could carry him. The finish of the race was now in sight. He looked up, and to his great consternation he saw that tortoise was just about to cross the line. He summoned all his strength, and made himself go as fast as the wind, but he crossed the line only to bump into tortoise, who was sitting there waiting for him! All the animals gathered were screaming and shouting. Hare went off by himself, his ears drooping with sadness and shame. Tortoise and his cousins had a party to celebrate their victory.

Once upon a time there was a chief in a village near the bush. This man had many sons, and one of them was the best hunter in the whole land. Whenever he went out hunting, he always managed to bring back much more meat than any of the other hunters in the village. But this hunter did not just like to provide meat for the villagers, he enjoyed the thrill of the hunt, stalking his prey and outsmarting it, and killing animals for fun. The chief often reprimanded his son, because he knew that the spirits of the forest and the ancestors did not approve of killing for fun or sport. But all his exhortations fell on deaf ears. His son's behaviour never changed.
As for the animals, they were both afraid of and angry with this hunter, and they called a meeting of all the bush animals to discuss if there was not some way to could stop this man. Some suggested setting traps to catch him, but everybody agreed that this hunter was too clever to fall into a trap, he would surely spot it from afar. Then the lion suggested that one of them should change into the shape of a young woman, in order to seduce the hunter. Then he could be lured into the bush and killed. It was decided that the lion's wife should be the one to do this job.
The next morning, the chief's son was getting ready to set out for the bush, he was gathering his weapons, his spear, his bow and arrows, and a machete, when his father approached him. 'son", said the chief, "Please stay home today. I had a dream last night that you went into the bush and got killed by a wild lion! Stay home today, please!"
But the son brushed aside his father's concerns, "Pah! Pah! Don't worry, old man, I can take care of myself. Any beast that tries to kill me will get off the worst, I promise you". And with that he set off, chuckling to himself. He had a good day in the bush, and had already killed as much meat as he could carry, so he decided to call it a day and make his way back home. Then to his surprise he saw a beautiful young girl approach him. Beautiful young girls do not usually come this far into the bush, so he called out to her: 'sister, what are you doing here in the bush? I can see you are not from our village". She smiled at him, "I heard about you", she said, "I heard that there is a hunter who is smarter and stronger than anyone. So I decided to look for you, and here you are!"
"I am just on my way home", said the hunter, "why don't you come with me to my village, and we will eat and drink something together". She agreed, so h took her back to the village and his father's compound. The chief thought it a bit odd that this young woman had been walking around the bush all by herself, but he was so happy that his son had returned home, and had not been killed by a lion as his dream predicted, that he did not question her at all. The son, in the meantime, was falling head over heels in love with this strange young woman, and before the night was out, he asked her to be his wife. She laughed, and told him that she would be very happy to be his wife, but she would have to ask her father's permission first. So they agreed that the next morning, they would set off early and visit her father.
So the next morning, after eating some fruit and porridge, they were read to set off. The hunter was gathering his weapons, but the girl asked him to leave them behind, as she explained it would be rude to turn up at her father's house so heavily armed. The hunter agreed to this, so they set off walking through the bush. When they had gone some distance from the village, the girl changed herself back into her natural lion shape, and attacked the hunter, who, having no weapons, was unable to defend himself. That evening, while the chief sat outside his hut waiting in vain for his son's return, the animals celebrated.

Once upon a time there was a town where all the people were exceedingly lazy. They didn't like to do any kind of work at all! They didn't clean up their yards, they didn't keep their streets clean, and they couldn't be bothered to weed their vegetable patches. The place was disgusting, it was a disgrace. The chief hated it, he quite liked cleanliness, and every so often he would start a clean-up campaign. But only a handful of people ever turned up to lend a hand, and even then they would stop working after one or two days, and the weeds would grow again and in the blink of an eye the place would be just as bad again as it ever was.
One day a hurricane blew through the town; after it had passed the place looked even worse than before, but the worst thing was that an enormous tree had been blown over and thrown right across the main road leading to the market place. The first trader came along, carrying his produce, and found the road blocked by the tree. He said: I haven't got time to move this tree! I've got to get my produce to the market!" So he walked around the tree, and carried on his way. And a second and a third trader came along and did exactly the same thing. Nobody could be bothered to do anything about the obstruction. People were coming and going, looking at the tree and just walking around it. The chief heard about the tree blocking the road. He asked; "Why don't some of these people get together and move it?" But days went by and nobody did anything about it and the tree remained where it was. The chief came up with a plan to teach his townspeople a lesson. Very early the next day, before the sun had come up, he took some of his servants and got them to dig a hole under the tree. He hid some gold in the hole and got his servants to cover it up again. Then he made them swear to keep this affair a secret. Back at his palace, he instructed his town crier to go round and summon all the citizens to gather at the spot of the fallen tree that afternoon.
When they were all together the chief made a speech to his people suggesting that if all of them worked together, it would not take very long to remove the obstacle. One of the farmers said: "The hurricane put that tree there, let's ask the hurricane to move it out of the way."
"Yes, said another, why should we exert ourselves?"
"What's wrong with walking around it?" asked another. The chief was exasperated. He was just about to give up when a skinny young man stepped forward. He was just a poor farmer, who had no living relatives in the town: "I will have a go," he said, and started pulling and pushing to shift the heavy tree. The other townspeople just stood there and watched, some making fun of the young man. The chief waited for a short while to see if anybody would come forward to help the young man, and when he saw that nobody else made a move, instructed his servants to lend a hand. Once the tree had been moved to the side of the road, the Chief went up to the young farmer, and took him to the spot where he'd buried the gold that morning. The chief told him to dig there, and promised him that he could keep whatever he found there. The young farmer started digging in the road, and very quickly uncovered the gold. He was overjoyed.
The chief said to him: "All this gold is yours to keep. You have deserved it, and you can do with it as you please." And to the lazy townspeople he said: "Let this be a lesson to you all! Laziness doesn't get you anything. Rewards come to the person who is prepared to work hard."

Once upon a time there lived a very great and honourable chief called Gbeyor. He had a daughter called Gbeofia, meaning queen of beauty. Gbeyor had given this name to his daughter because she was the most beautiful girl in the whole village. When she had reached the age of 21, Gbeofia called her father and told him that she wanted to marry. Gbeyor was aghast! He shouted at his daughter: "Hai, my only daughter! My queen of queens! What are you trying to tell me? I will not allow you to marry any man in this village. My daughter, you are so beautiful and precious to me, therefore I would like you to marry a man who is very rich and handsome."
Before long word got around in the village that Gbeofia wanted to marry, and the conditions that her father had imposed. In spite of this, some of the men in the village still thought they might have a chance. Therefore some of them would call on the chief's place every Saturday evening, carrying special drinks and some expensive cloth as presents requesting Gbeofia's hand in marriage. Gbeyor could see that they were only farmers and that they were not good enough to marry his precious daughter.
One evening Mr Spider made his way to the chief's door, carrying a bottle of local gin. The chief laid eyes on Mr Spider and asked him harshly: "Hey Mr Spider, what do you want in my palace?" Mr Spider answered in a very polite manner. "Please chief, I an here to marry your beautiful daughter." The chief got very angry and shouted: "You fool! Come on, clear off! You think you can come along here with a bottle of local gin, and marry my daughter? My daughter, who is the queen of queens Get out of my face!" Mr spider left without speaking any further, just as some more of the village men were arriving, carrying their presents. When Mr Spider got home he went to his room, sat down and concentrated on trying to think of a trick he could play so that he could marry the chief's daughter after all. Mr Spider realized after some time that the girl liked eating pawpaw. He remembered he had seen her in the area near his house several times, to pick the fruit of the pawpaw trees that grew there. "Yes, he thought, pawpaw is probably one of her favourite foods!" This gave Mr Spider the idea for the trick he decided to play on them.
Mr Spider started hanging around the pawpaw tree, so that he could waylay the girl on her next visit there. He didn't have to wait very long, but to Mr Spider's dismay, she was accompanied by her mother when she turned up. At first Mr Spider was a little worried, because he had not reckoned on the mother being there. But he was a resourceful fellow after all, and before long he had thought of a trick. He went up to the mother and said: "Hello, mother dear, can I pluck some pawpaw for you? These pawpaw trees are so difficult to climb for you ladies. Allow me to get up there and get the best fruit for you people!" The women had no objections to Mr Spider's proposal, so he climbed the pawpaw tree and started picking the fruit. Very quickly he'd picked a bag full of the fruit, and the mother called up to him: "Hello, my son, this is quite enough for us!" But Mr Spider hadn't finished yet, and he told her: "Ooh mother, this is not enough for you, so I want to pick just a few more!" The women didn't want to argue, so they just said, "OK, that's very good of you, carry on picking as many as you like!"
Mr Spider climbed a bit further up the tree, pretending to look for the best fruit. Within the twinkle of an eye Mr Spider intentionally fell down and started wailing: "Adish! Adish! Today my life finish! My leg – Oh my leg, Oh my leg!" As he lay there wailing the women became very frightened, and didn't know what to do to help Mr Spider. "Oh dearme Oh dearme, you poor fellow! What can we do for you?" the mother asked. The crafty Mr Spider, pretending to be in a great amount of pain said: "Take me to your house! Please take me to your house!" Between them mother and daughter carried Mr Spider to their house. When they reached there, the mother asked Mr Spider if there was anything she could do for him. Mr Spider asked her to give him a bath. The mother consented, and proceeded to give Mr Spider a bath. After having his bath, he asked the woman to find him some mats so that he could lie down and have a rest. She quickly found a mat for Mr Spider, and he lay down on it.
Mr Spider rested for a short while, then when he heard somebody move around in the next room, he started moaning again. Gbeofia's mother was in the room nextdoor, and heard the moaning. She came into Mr Spider's room, and asked him if there was anything he needed. "EhEh, Mother, answered Mr Spider, I am so uncomfortable, all my limbs are aching and this heat seems to be making it worse. Maybe if you help me remove all my clothing I might be more comfortable!" So mother helped Mr Spider get undressed, and he stretched out on the mat again, completely naked. She went back to take care of her business in the next room, and for a short while all was quiet. But not for long. Mr Spider started moaning again, and the woman came over to his side once more. She was getting eather worried about Mr Spider's condition, and asked him what else she might do to alleviate the pain he was in. "EhEh, Mother, there is just one thing that will make me better," said Mr Spider. The woman asked him to tell her what this might be. Mr Spider coughed, then he said: "I want you to ask your daughter to come her and lie on top of me!" This rather took the good woman by surprise. "That's impossible!" she exclaimed. But Mr Spider was very tricky, and he knew exactly what to say to get his way. "I'm afraid if she doesn't come and lie with me, I will surely die all at once!" said he to the woman. She was genuinely afraid that Mr Spider might indeed die from his injuries, so she went to find her daughter. She explained the situation to her, and although her daughter was not at all sure that she wanted to do this, eventually she let herself be persuaded by her mother. She came into Mr Spider's room and lay on top of him on the mat.
Two hours later Mr Spider burst into laughter. "Hahahaha! I am very very lucky! I won this situation and I am now free. Wot! I really took these women for a ride."

Once upon a time there lived a woman whose name was Aftermath. She had one daughter, whose name was Akuvi. Her husband had died when the girl was still very young. As Akuvi grew up she began to rebel against her mother's authority. If Aftermath asked her to fetch water she would refuse, if Aftermath asked her to pound some yam, the girl would snarl and sulk. Mother used to curse her daughter, but all to no avail. "You think I'm hard on you, she would say, just wait if you keep behaving like this you'll meet your fate one day!" This went on for quite some time, until one day the mother again asked Akuvi to fetch some water from the well. Akuvi refused bluntly. "Why do I always have to fetch your water, mother? Why can't you get it for yourself. You have arms and legs just like I do!" Aftermath got so angry at her daughter's insolence that she took a cane and beat her. This in turn made Akuvi very angry. "that's it! She said, That's it! I've had enough, I'm going!" With that she took some of her clothes, packed them in a bundle and left home. She really had no idea where she was going, she had nobody to turn to, she didn't know anybody outside the small village they lived in.
As there was nowhere else to go she headed towards the forest. After she'd been walking for some time, she came across a small farm. On the edge stood an old hut, and outside the hut sat an old lady. Akuvi had never seen such an old lady, she must be at least a hundred years old! Akuvi walked up to the old lady, who looked her in the eye, and asked "Who are you and where are you from?" Akuvi just about opened her mouth to answer, when the old lady shouted 'stop! Don't speak! I know all about you!" She wagged her crooked fingers at the girl. "Your mother tried her best to bring you up well, but you wouldn't have it, would you? You thought you knew better. You wouldn't listen to your mother, well, now you're here, you'll see something else! Welcome, my dear! "
The old lady took her in, gave her some food and a corner of her hut where she could lie down to sleep. The next morning the old lady took Akuvi to her field, where she grew some vegetables; yam, cassava, beans. The old lady spread her arms and said to Akuvi: "what you see here is my farm, I grow everything here, and you will have to help me. Everytime I send you to pick something, these plants will talk to you. Some will say: Don't touch me please, I'm too young, or: I've only just been planted, I'm not ripe yet! I want you to ignore them don't take any notice; just pick the one that protests loudest."
That same afternoon the old lady sent the girl to the farm to pick some cassava and yam so that they could pound some fufu for their supper. As she entered the field the plants started talking to her. One of them said: Look girl, I'm too old to be here, and fed up being stuck here in this field, come and pick me!" Another said: "Please don't pick me, I've just been planted! Go to the next one!" With all these voices coming at her from all directions Akuvi got scared; nothing like this had ever happened to her in her entire life. She wanted to run away but she was frightened of what the old lady would do to her. So she gathered up all her courage and started picking the plants that were saying they were not ripe enough or mature enough to be picked, just as the old lady had told her to do. She took the vegetables home and the old lady instructed her to peel them and boil them. She finished this task, and then looked for mortar and pestle to pound the fufu, but she couldn't find these anywhere. So she went to the old lady and asked her what she should use. The old lady told her: "I haven't got a mortar or pestle and I still eat fufu. I still manage to pound it!" All Akuvi could say was: "Well, how do you do it? Can you show me?" The old lady raised an arm, and said to Akuvi, "Go to the back of the house. There you'll find a log, bring it here. When Akuvi came back with the log a few minutes later, the old lady was lying on the ground, and instructed Akuvi to put the wood under her head.
Resting her head on the log, she told Akuvi to use her nostrils as the mortar; pointing to them she said: "This is where you'll pound the fufu!"
Akuvi was shocked, never had she heard of anything like this before. But the old lady reassured her: "Don't worry dear, I always do it like this and it comes out perfect every time. Now it became clear to Akuvi that the old lady had magical powers. Her nostrils expanded into a big bowl, and Akuvi was able to pound the fufu. When she finished the old lady told Akuvi to go her room where she kept a pot full of soup, and to bring it out to her. Akuvi hung the pot over the fire to heat the soup, and brought out a little table for the old lady to eat at. The old lady sat down and started to eat. Akuvi washed her hands and sat down with the old lady as she was by now very hungry.
But the old lady stopped her taking any food. "Don't even think about it. Before I let you have any of this food, you have to tell me what my name is." Akuvi didn't know the old lady's name, she had absolutely no idea. How could she? Nobody in the village had ever even mentioned her. She started guessing some names, Mawutor, Mawuko, but all the names she could think of were the wrong ones, and she was not allowed to touch any of the food. After the old lady finished her meal she gave the pot to Akuvi to fetch some water from the river. Obediently Akuvi took the pot and made her way to the river. As she approached the water, she saw a crab. The crab called out to her: "Hey there, little girl! I know what's happening to you, that old witch has got you guessing her name, hasn't she? I can help you because I know her very well!"
Akuvi was very excited: "Mr Crab, if you know her name please tell me and help me out of my misery!" The crab answered: "Her name is Zeglo. Call her Mama Zeglo!" Akuvi jumped in the air, she was so happy, at last she would get something to eat. She thanked the crab profusely, and set off home again. But she was so happy, she was dancing and jumping all the way home, carrying the pot filled with water on her head. She stumbled over some stones that were strewn on the path, the pot fell off her head and broke into a hundred pieces. She started to cry, she knew the old lady would be furious with her. Slowly she finished the walk home, and as she came up to the house the old lady was sitting outside, waiting for her. When the old lady saw her, she asked immediately: "What happened to my pot? Where is my water?"
Akuvi answered "Mama Zeglo, I fell down on the path and your pot broke."
The old lady was astonished that Akuvi had guessed her name correctly, so she asked her: "How did you find out my name? Who told you?"
Akuvi replied that she met a crab by the river who told her. The old lady jumped up, she was indeed furious. "I'm going down to the riverside, I'll find that stupid old crab and teach him a lesson!" She got up, took her stick and a calabash and walked briskly towards the river. She fully intended to punish the crab for his indiscretion. And she did indeed find the crab still rooting around in the sand on the riverbank, and addressed him in an angry tone: "Why on earth did you disclose my name to that young girl? What business is it of yours?" The crab hardly deigned to look at the old lady. "Why don't you bugger off, he said. Who do you think you are; can't I mention your name to anybody?" The old lady got even more annoyed, and she raised her stick and hit the crab on the back. Wallop! And again: Woosh!
The crab jumped sideways and shouted at the old lady: "Hey what! What are you playing at? Hitting me? You don't know me! Just you wait!" The crab dived under the water, and started scooping up white sand, splashing it all over the old lady's head so that all her hair turned white. She got ever more angry, so angry that she just threw the calabash at the crab, which landed on his back and got stuck there. She tried to pull it off, but try as she might, it was stuck hard. The crab groaned, and the old lady cursed, but they could not remove it. That's why when you see a crab now, it's got a hard shell on his back, and when you see an old lady, her hair is white all over!

Long ago a man called Kofi Amero lived in a village called Amero Kopfhi. The village was named after him because in those days he was the wealthiest man in the whole area. Kofi Amero was a very strict man, but he wasn't fair, no, he was nasty and selfish. In spite of his wealth, he lived by himself, without a wife or child, because no woman could tolerate his strange behaviour.
One sunny day, after Kofi Amero had taken his breakfast, he was relaxing on the front porch of his house, when all of a sudden he caught sight of a stranger dressed in the most tattered and shabby clothing. The man looked so weird that Kofi Amero decided he must be a madman and tried to ignore him. He was a little surprised when the man addressed him and asked for some food. Kofi Amero didn't like giving charity, and he was quite annoyed the man should ask for something. But he had some uncooked kokoyam lying around under the window, so he took a small dry piece and threw it at the beggar. The man grasped the vegetable greedily and ate it within seconds. When he had eaten every last bite, and licked his fingers in the process, he straightened himself and before Kofi Amero's astonished eyes changed into an angel of god.
Kofi dropped to the floor. The stranger requested Kofi Amero not to be disturbed, he meant him no harm. He said: "Kofi, as you were kind enough to let me share some of your food, even though you thought I might be a troublesome beggar, before I leave this place, I will grant you any three wishes that you may make."
As you can imagine Kofi Amero got very excited when he heard this. "Hahahah, heeheehee, today is going to be a good day for me!" He scratched his head, wondering what he could possibly ask of the angel, then asked him to come inside. He pointed to an old armchair in the corner of his room. "Master, he said, you see that chair in the corner, there?" The angel nodded, "Yes, I can see it."
Kofi continued: "Well, you see, I bought that chair for myself, at great expense, so that I may rest after a hard days' work. But it is the only chair in my house, and every time I get a visitor, they have to sit in it, and I have to remain standing or sit on the floor. That really bothers me. I'd like you to put a spell on it, so that if anybody sits on it, other than myself, of course, the chair buckles and throws its occupant into the air! So high that when they fall onto the ground they'll be hurt and will never want to sit on my chair again!"
Even though the angel thought this was rather an unusual request, he had given his word, so he said to Kofi: "It is done."
Kofi Amero rubbed his hands together, and took the angel back to the front of the house, where he pointed out a tree; "Master, do you see this tree?" The angel nodded, "Yes, I see it." Kofi explained: "I planted it, a great expense, in order to improve the environment, to make the place look nice and green, but you know, Master, I've noticed that people from the village have been stealing the leaves from my tree. They say it has some medicinal qualities and that it cures children's illnesses, but I'm not at all happy with that, not at all!" Kofi coughed, and then continued: 'so Master, I'd like you to put a spell on it, so that anybody who tries to pluck a leaf, gets sucked onto the tree and gets stuck to the trunk!
Again, the angel considered this to be a rather strange request, but he it was not his job to judge the merits of people's wishes, so he had no other choice but to grant that one too. So he told Kofi: "Very well, Kofi, it is done. What is your third and last wish?"
Kofi asked the angel to follow him to the back of his house. There he pointed out some hoes and rakes and other gardening tools. "You see these tools, Master?" asked Kofi. The angel nodded. "Yes, I can see them, fine tools they are." "Exactly, agreed Kofi. I bought these tools, they cost me a lot of money, I don't need to tell you. People come all the time to borrow them. Sometimes they ask, sometimes they don't, they just pick them up and take advantage of my good nature. And of course when they break, it's down to me to pay for the repairs. So I'd like you to make them soo soo heavy, that every time somebody tries to pick them up, other than me, of course, they just drop them and they fall on their toes! Then next time they'll think twice about wanting to use my tools!"
The angel nodded sadly, "Very well, Kofi, he said, it is done. I leave you now." After that the angel vanished into thin air where he was standing and Kofi Amero was left on his own again. As usual.
Several days later, as Kofi Amero was cleaning up after his supper, Satan came to visit him. Of course Kofi Amero didn't recognize his visitor, he showed him into the house and offered him the only chair to sit on. The visitor lowered himself onto the seat, and as soon as he touched it, the seat threw him up into the air, and as he fell down with a great thud, he hurt his leg. The visitor got up, straightened his clothes, swore at Kofi Amero, and limped away. Kofi Amero laughed and laughed, he was happy that his trap had worked and that night he slept exceptionally well.
On another day Kofi Amero was getting ready to go to work when he heard a loud commotion at the back of the house. He walked round there and was pushed aside by one of his neighbours, who was limping and cursing the day he first laid eyes on Kofi Amero. Kofi laughed out loud and called after the neighbour: "Let that teach you a lesson! You should save up and buy your own tools!" The incident put Kofi Amero in a good mood for the rest of the day.
On yet another day, he was returning from a hard day's work in the fields, when he noticed a woman from the village, carrying a baby on her back, walk up to the tree in the front of his house. It was obvious that she intended to pluck some leaves from the tree, and Kofi Amero stopped and watched with anticipation to see of his third trap would work as well as the first two. As soon as the hapless woman touched a leaf, she was pulled towards the tree by an invisible force, and found herself stuck to the trunk. She called out for help, but Kofi Amero just laughed at her.
'serves you right, he called out to her. You people think you can just take what's mine without paying! You think about it while you're stuck there!"
That evening Kofi Amero was having his supper, he couldn't stop laughing to himself at the plight of the woman stuck to the tree, and the two men who had fallen into his traps. The more he thought about it, the more he had to laugh; his laughter came out in uncontrollable bursts.
But suddenly he stopped: a sharp pain shot through his chest, and Kofi Amero collapsed, he'd suffered a heart attack. A few days later Kofi Amero's brother, who worked a field next to Kofi's, became curious about the fact that he hadn't seen his brother for some time, and decided to call on him. He found Kofi dead on the floor of his room. Immediately he set about informing other members of the family, and making the funeral arrangements. As the body had already started to decompose, this had to be done in rather a hurry. Kofi Amero was buried without much ceremony, only two of his brothers attended the funeral. None of the villagers wanted to waste any of their time mourning a man they all despised.
So it was that Kofi Amero arrived at the gates of heaven to be judged. He was greeted there by the angel who had appeared to him some time ago, but Kofi Amero didn't recognize him. The angel produced a large book, and invited Kofi Amero to look at was written there about him. "As you can see, Kofi Amero, said the angel, during your lifetime you have only ever done one good thing, that is when you gave me some of your kokoyam. But everything else that's written about you is about all the bad and selfish things you did to your family and your neighbours. You're not qualified to enter this place. You have to go to hell."
So Kofi Amero walked away from the gates of heaven and made his way to the gates of hell. When he got there he found Satan waiting for him. Satan recognized him as the man who played a nasty trick on him with a chair, and flatly refused him entry. So Kofi Amero was denied access to heaven and hell. Because he had failed to please either the masters of heaven or the masters of hell his soul was doomed to roam restlessly in the space in between for eternity.

Once upon a time there lived a woman who couldn't have children. Because of that all her husbands kept leaving her. One day she was feeling so sad, miserable and lonely that she decided to go and see a witch doctor, for him to help her have a baby. The witch doctor said: "How can I help you? To have a baby you need a husband, and you haven't got a husband!" She begged him to do everything in his power. In the end he relented; "OK, he said, I'll see what I can do, but it won't be easy. But as I've got a reputation to keep up, I'll perform a miracle on you." He gave the woman three limes and told her to take them home with her. "At the end of each day, he said, for the next three days, before you go to bed, make sure you have a bath. Wash your hands thoroughly. Take one of the limes and cut it in two, squeeze the juice, rub it on your tummy, your thighs and your hands."
The woman followed these instructions exactly. After a few weeks, she noticed that her stomach and her thighs were getting big. She got worried, and went back to see the witchdoctor again to ask his advice. He told her not to worry, these were the signs that the magic was working. "You just have to go through with this, you will be fine," he said. He added that once the children got big, and started to wonder about their father, she should tell them that the father is a one-eyed antelope.
As time went by, she got bigger and bigger. After nine months her left thigh just opened up and a baby boy jumped out. Then her stomach opened up and a baby girl jumped out. She was very happy that at last she was a mother, and for some time they lived happily like any normal family. She called the boy Atta, and the girl she called Attakuma. As the children grew older, they became very headstrong. They always did exactly what they liked and took little or no notice of their mother's wishes or commands.
One day when her twins were about ten years old, the woman told them: Your dad is not a human. He is an antelope with one eye. If you go hunting and you come across a one-eyed antelope, don't kill it, it could be your father. The children promised her they would never kill any one eyed antelope they might come across.
One day the twins went hunting. They walked really far searching the jungle for meat. They spent all day searching, then decided to go back home empty handed. One the way back they encountered a one-eyed antelope. Atta said to his sister: "Look at the size of that antelope! Let's shoot it and take it home." "No no, no, said Attakuma, remember what our mother told us, if we shoot it, we might be killing our father!" Atta turned to his sister and snorted: "What!? You believe that stuff? How can our father be an animal. No way, that's impossible!" With that he raised his bow and shot the antelope right in its heart. The beast died immediately. But the animal was so big and heavy that it was impossible for them to carry. They had to make some rope, tied it round the animal and dragged it all the way back home. Their mother hadn't returned from the market yet, so they set about cooking a delicious meal. When mother got home she was very pleased to find that her children had prepared a meal for her, and set down immediately to eat. But after a few bites, she thought this meat tasted just like antelope meat. She called out to her children: "Is this antelope meat I'm eating? Did you kill an antelope today?" "Yes" replied Atta. The mother screamed and threw her food away. "Oh, lord Oh lord; the witchdoctor warned me about this. What am I going to do, I'm sick and tired; these children of mine, they never listen, they always disobey me."
The next day she went out and bought two chairs. These chairs she took to Mister Death, and explained to him that she'll be sending her twins along later to collect the chairs. "When they get here, she said, I want you to capture them, and take them to the other side for me." Death agreed to this quite happily. The woman went home and told her children she had just bought two chairs for them, but they were too heavy for her to carry, so she left them with the merchant. So the twins set out to fetch the chairs from the merchant. When they got to Death's house he told them to sit and wait while he got the chairs from the back. But he came back with a rope, and tried to tie them up. The twins however were far too quick and smart for him, and got away. Back home, they told their mother what had happened. "That nasty man tried to kill us!" Attakuma said. "No. no, said the mother, you must have done something to upset him" But she was upset that her plan hadn't worked.
A few days later she tried again. This time she bought some bread, and left it with Death, and asked her twins to collect it for her. But Attakuma had a plan. She told her brother to go to the front of Death's house, and ask for the bread. This Atta did. In the meantime Attakuma went round the back of the house, and found the rope. She knew Death would come and get the rope to tie up Atta, so she waited on the roof, and when Death came outside, she jumped on him and tied him up. On the way home, Atta said to his sister: "Our mother is trying to get rid of us. We must leave the village before she succeeds in her plans one of these days." They decided they would have to run away from home, but the were sure that their mother would come after them, so they had to find a way to stop her. The next day, while their mother was working in the market, they dug a big hole in the backyard, where everybody always washed. They covered it with a few branches and some leaves, and filled a bucket with water, which they left on the other side of the trap. They prepared some food and waited for their mother to come home. After she had eaten, Attakuma said to her, "We filled a bucket with water for your bath, and left it outside for you." Mother was pleasantly surprised at these little kindnesses, but unfortunately for her, she didn't suspect anything. She went out into the backyard to have her bath; in the dark she didn't see the trap her children had laid, and fell into the hole. Atta and Attakuma left straight away and walked all night. They knew that one of the neighbours would find their mother soon enough, and they wanted to get as far away as possible.
Early the next morning they came across a small hut, where they found an old blind man. He was very old, and had a long white beard, and he was cooking some food in front of his hut. The children stopped, and Atta said to him: "What a pity! An old man like you having to cook your own food! Don't you have any children? You can't even see anything!" The old man grunted: "I'm here on my own. Everybody else left this village a long time ago." Attakuma said: "Don't worry old man, we'll help you cook your food."
So the twins set about cooking the food, but then they ate it all by themselves, while the old man sat back and waited. After they had finished the food, the filled a bowl with water and put it in front of the old man. They told him the food was ready, and to go ahead and enjoy it. Then they set off on the path again, leaving the poor old man to discover that he'd been tricked. As they walked away they heard him shouting and cursing them, but they just laughed. They kept walking through the bush.
The next day they met an old woman on a small farm. She was crawling around on the soil, planting groundnuts. Atta said to her: "What? What a shame! You shouldn't be working at your age! Give us the bowl and we'll plant those groundnuts for you." The old lady was very grateful for a little help, and she gladly gave them the bowl. She chuckled: "I'll go and sit over there in the shade and watch you children work!" The twins started work, Atta digging holes in the ground with his bare hands, and Attakuma following behind, filling them up again with soil. Instead of putting the nuts in the soil, she put hid them in a sack that was tied around her neck. After a while they noticed that the old woman had dozed off, and they wandered off, eating the nuts for their supper. When the woman woke up, she went round to inspect the children's work, and could find no nuts in any of the holes. She cursed the children, but blamed herself for putting her trust in these vagabonds.
The next day the twins came across another old woman, sitting outside her hut. She had a small girl on her lap, who'd been hurt, and she was cleaning the wound. The twins approached her to have a good look. Attakuma said to her: "What are you doing there? That water should be hot! That wound looks very bad, you'll never clean it with cold water!" The looked around and saw a fire burning by the side of the house. Atta took the bucket with the water, and heated it over the fire. "We'll show you how to do it," he said, laughing. When the water was hot, he brought it over and put the bucket on the ground next to the old woman. "Give me the baby, Atta said to the woman, we'll get her fixed up in no time!" He took the girl from the woman's lap, and held her over the bucket filled with hot water. The old woman didn't like the look of this, and she jumped up, grabbing her stick. As she did so, she kicked over the bucket, and the hot water spilled over her feet, scalding them. She started screaming and waving her stick at the twins, at which Atta dropped the little girl, and he and Attakuma ran away, laughing. The old woman was furious, and decided to follow them so that she could teach them a lesson. First she wrapped some old cloth around her scalded feet, then she tied the girl onto her back. She picked up her stick, and followed the twins. But of course they were much quicker than she could ever be, and she couldn't see them. But she was so furious that she was determined to catch up with them. She went to see an old witchdoctor who lived nearby, and told him what had happened. The witchdoctor agreed that she should go after these nasty youngsters and punish them. He gave her a stick, and said: "Tap this stick on the ground three times, and you will be able to see their footprints, to show you where they went. Just follow the footprints and you will catch up with them."
At one end of the stick were three small branches, one was covered in gold, one in cowries and the other in kente cloth. The old lady thanked him, and went on her way, back to her hut, so that she could discover their tracks. When she got there, she hit the stick on the ground three times, as she had been told, and the ends of the stick started to glow. Soon the twins' footprints became visible to her, and she followed them.
The twins had been resting a little further along the way, when they heard the old lady approaching. They didn't want the old lady to find hem so they climbed the tallest tree they could find to hide in the foliage. But the old lady had spotted them, and walked right up to the tree where they were hiding. She hit the trunk of the tree three times with the stick the witchdoctor had given her, and the whole tree began to shake violently. The twins couldn't hold on and the both fell out. Before he fell, Atta managed to grab a leaf from his sack, and chewed it as he was falling, so that when he hit the ground he wasn't hurt. But Attakuma didn't move, she just lay there as if dead. Atta took the chewed up leaf from his mouth, and squeezed some of the juice in his sister's nostril upon which she immediately regained consciousness.
They ran away as fast as they could, the old lady following at her own slow pace. Presently they came to a very big river, they could only just make out the other side. They knew that in order to escape the old woman pursuing them they would have to get across the water. Just then a large vulture landed on the riverbank. They ran up to the bird and asked for its help. "We're being pursued by an old witch, explained Attakuma, and she wants to kill us! We have to get to the other side of the water, please help us!" The vulture agreed to help them, and told them to climb on his back. He flew up easily and was over on the other side of the river in no time. After the children climbed off his back, Atta said to the vulture: "Be careful if you see that old woman. She might ask you to take her across as well, because she appears quite determined to catch us!"
Attakuma joined in: "If she asks you, you should say yes, certainly, but then make sure you drop her in the middle of the water! I'm sure she can't swim!" The vulture just grinned. "Don't you youngsters worry about me, he said. I'm quite capable of looking after myself." As he flew back across the water, the twins decided to stay a while, and see what would happen.
The vulture returned to the other side of the river, and there he saw the old woman carrying her grandchild on her back, sitting in the sand, rubbing her poor aching feet, exhausted by her efforts. He greeted her and asked her if she was the one chasing a boy and a girl across the bush. The old woman confirmed that she was indeed the one, and then explained to the vulture what they had done to her and her granddaughter, and how, with the help of the witchdoctor's stick, she had been able to follow them. The vulture was shocked and agreed to help the old woman teach the twins a lesson. He asked to borrow the magic stick, which he took in his strong beak, and went in search of a large piece of flotsam. He soon found something suitable, and lifted it up with his claws. Then he flew high up over the water, carrying the stick in his beak, and the flotsam in his claws. When he was over the middle of the water, he dropped the flotsam, which landed in the water with a big splash. The twins were on the other side of the water, watching the vulture. They saw him drop a large shape, and they assumed that this was the old lady. They cheered loudly, and watched as the vulture made his way towards them. "Well done, vulture! That taught the old hag a lesson!" they shouted.
The vulture now hovered over them with the magic stick. First he hit Atta on the head with it, then Attakuma. Atta shouted "Hey, mister vulture, what are you doing?" Attakuma just screamed. Their legs, their feet and their toes turned into roots, and dug into the sand at the water's edge, their bodies turned into tree trunks, and their heads, arms, hands and fingers turned into branches. As leaves started to grow on the branches, a few moans were heard, then all fell silent except for the leaves rustling in the wind, and the sound of water lapping the roots. That's how mangrove trees came to grow by the side of the river.

Once upon a time a hyena was out foraging in the bush. It was a fine sunny day and he was looking forward to catching some morsels to eat. But as he was sniffing around, he fell into a hidden trap set by a hunter. He found himself at the bottom of a hole, with the trap catch closed over him. He tried to push it open but iit just would not budge. It was rather well made.
So he started shouting: "Help! Help! Somebody get me out of here please. A lion passed by, looked to see who was in the trap. When he saw it was hyena, he just moved on. Help me, let me out of here, please!", hyena shouted, but the lion closed his ears. You should know that most animals did not like hyena very much. He was always stealing food belonging to other animals and laughing at them behind their backs. So it was no surprise the lion moved on.
So the day passed, but every time an animal passed by the trap, however much hyena begged and promised to be nice to them in future, none stopped to help him. At last monkey came by. "Help me please, monkey, get me out of this trap. I've been here all day and the hunter will be back soon and he will surely kill me! Help me please!"
"Well now", monkey said, "That's all very well. I would help you, but as soon as I pull you out of there, you will only kill me." Hyena protested, "monkey, I promise I will be good, I will not touch a hair on your head. If you let me out I will go straight home. I promise!" Now this monkey was very kind, so he agreed to help hyena. He removed the trap and threw down a branch so hyena could pull himself out of the trap. But then as soon as he was out, hyena realised he's been in this trap all day long and had not eaten anything, at all! So, instead of going home, as he had promised, hyena attacked the kind monkey.
Just then an eagle was flying over the bush, and saw the hyena attacking monkey. So he swooped down, landed on the hyena's back, and with his powerful claws pulled the animal of poor monkey, who was screeching in pain. After he'd separated the two, hyena wanted to know what was going on. Monkey explained what had happened: that he had helped hyena escape from the trap because he had promised not to attack him!
Eagle said: "In order for me to understand exactly how this happened, I would like you to show me exactly what you two were doing. So, Mr Hyena, you get back into the trap, and then we will start again." Hyena realised he did not have much choice but to do as he was told, so he jumped back into the trap. Eagle the covered it again with the trap, and made sure it was secure. "Now, Mr Hyena", said eagle, "you can stay there and die, for all I care. You don't deserve the kindness of other animals if you cannot keep a simple promise". With that, he advised the monkey to go home to his family, and he himself flew off to continue his journey, leaving the hyena to his fate.

Mr Spider, who is popularly known as Ananse, is renowned to be a man of tricks. Have you ever asked yourself why he is bald? This is the story of how this came about.
One afternoon, after Mr spider had enjoyed his lunch, he sat down in his yard to relax. His lunch had been particularly nice, so soon enough he snoozed off into a slumber, and sat there snoring: nrrrroorrroogh! nrrrroorrrroogh! nrrroorrrooogh!
Suddenly there was the sound of someone knocking on the door, and this woke him up. Mr Spider opened the door, and there he saw Nana Petra. Spider said: "Eeh, Nana Petra, you are welcome! It's a long time since you called to see me." He took his visitor inside the house, and offered him everything he needed as a visitor. Mr Spider asked Nana Petra: "My brother, may I know your intention of coming here at this crucial hour?"
Nana Petra paused for some time, then spoke solemnly: "HmHmHm, it is sad news I bring you, brother spider." Hearing this Mr Spider was confused and asked: "What is this sad news that you bring Nana Petra?"
Nana Petra continued: "Your majesty, Mr Spider, I am very sorry to announce to you the death of my father, Eja Mimou." Now as Nana Petra was Ananse's brother-in-law, this made Eja Mimou his father-in-law. When Ananse heard the news, he could hardly believe it. So he asked his brother again: "Nana Petra, are you joking or are you serious?" Nana Petra assured him that he was not joking, and eventually Ananse understood that his dear father-in-law was no more.
Before Nana Petra left again, he told Ananse that the funeral and the rites would be held three days later in the residence of his late father-in-law. After Nana Petra left, Ananse went to see his close friend, Mr Dog, and told him he would very much like him to accompany him to the funeral and last rites of his departed father-in-law. Mr Dog agreed. When it was time to go to the funeral Mr Spider told his friend Mr Dog he should carry along his guitar, so they could play some mournful tunes at the funeral ground. They slowly made their way to the house where the funeral was taking place. Mr Spider had dressed himself in some very expensive cloth and put on a large dark hat to show his respect for the deceased.
When the friends arrived everybody was very excited, in spite of the fact that there had been a bereavement, because Mr Spider was such a well known and great personality. They were very happy to see him there, and he was offered one of the best seats in the house. Shortly after, Mr Spider asked the people to excuse him and went into the kitchen, where he found a large pot of beans on the fire. Mr Spider removed his hat, and dished a large quantity of the beans into the hat, which he then put back on his head, even though the hot beans made him squint. When he came back to his seat, he and his friend Mr Dog were offered food. Mr Dog ate all the food given him, but Mr Spider refused to eat. He explained: "I can never eat, since I am so bereaved because my great father-in-law is no longer alive." Mr Spider insisted that he would not touch any of the food. The people tried and tried and tried several times over to convince him, but all their efforts came to nothing and he steadfastly refused.
After some few hours Mr Spider said to the people that he would have to leave, as there was another ceremony going on in the house of his own father where he also had to attend. The people once again tried to persuade him to eat something before departing, but again he steadfastly refused.
While Mr Spider had been talking to the people, he had been nodding his head. He didn't want to nod his head, but he couldn't help it, the movement was forced on him by the heat of the beans inside his hat. Some of the people noticed that he was nodding his head rather a lot, and one of them asked: "Dear Mr Spider, Sir, why are you nodding your head so much?" He answered in a loud voice: "When it's hot like this, don't you all shake your head?"
After that Mr Spider and his friend Mr Dog departed from the funeral ground. On their way home Ananse could not sustain the suffering the hot beans were causing to his poor head. The heat was just getting too too much! He finally had no choice: with a great scream he removed his large black hat and the beans spilled out all over the street. Some people who had been walking along stopped to gaze at him, and others came out of their houses, attracted by the commotion. One said: "This man, he is a foolish man!"
Another said: "He is not normal! What normal person would carry beans inside his hat and cover his head with it?"
Then Mr Dog said to his friend: "My dear Spider, whatever happened to your beautiful hair?" Mr Spider touched his head, and noticed that all his hair had disappeared. The beans had been so hot that they burned off all his hair, and from that moment onwards Mr Spider and all his offspring went around with a bald head.

Once upon a time, in the distant past, there was a great war between the animals who live in the sky and those that live on the ground. Nobody now remembers how the war started or what it was about, but it was a terrible time. Many animals on both sides were wounded or killed, and eventually somebody said that if they carried on like this, there would be no animals left on the earth. So some of the sky animals and some of the ground animals had a meeting, and as nobody could recall what they were fighting each other for, it was agreed that a truce should be called, and peace declared.
For the sky dwellers, the heron was appointed to make the announcements, and for the ground animals, the hare would do this job, as he was able to get around the area very quickly. This was done the next morning, but as all animals settled down, realising they could now live in peace and rebuild their lives, some body found the body of Mr Bat. He was the last victim of the war, and must have been killed late the previous day. All the flying animals were very upset, and the decided to organise a big burial for their friend. But as they were preparing his body for the funeral, one of the birds noticed that Mr Bat had teeth in his mouth.
How was that possible? Flying animals don't have teeth. They called a meeting, and they agreed that Bat can't be one of them, as no other bird has teeth in his mouth. So they took bat's body to the ground animals, and told them that as Mr Bat was not a bird, it was their responsibility to give him a decent burial. The ground animals agreed to accept the body, but then, as they were preparing for the burial, one of them shouted: "Wait a minute, this bat may have teeth, but he definitely also has wings! How can he be one of us if he has wings?"
So now the ground animals had a meeting to consider the problem, and they decided that no ground animal can have wings, so therefore, Mr Bat can't be regarded as one of them. So they too, refused to bury Mr Bat. Poor Mr Bat, the flying animals refused to accept him because he has teeth, and the ground animals refused to accept him because he has wings. And that is why the bat is still flying around every night.

A very long time ago, before man came along to upset the natural balance, all animals lived together peacefully. But in those days, none of the animals had heads of their own, except the elephant, who was the King of the animals. He had a large collection of heads in all shapes and sizes, which he kept stored in a large cave. Every time an animal wished to leave the village compound to go out into the field or the bush, he would go to the elephant first and ask to borrow a head. On his return to the animal village the head would be returned to the king's store. This worked very well for a time. The only problem was that there were not quite enough heads for all the animals. There always seemed to be one short, so at least one of the animals always had to stay behind in the village. Eventually some of the animals became dissatisfied that every time they wanted to go out, they had to waste time to collect a head and then return it again. The King agreed to have a meeting and it was decided that each animal should be given its own head to keep for all time. The King started making all the arrangements, assisted by his secretary, the crab, and when all was ready and all the heads were lined up in the village square, he sent out the cockerel, who had been given a head for this purpose, to announce that all animals should come to the square so that the King could give them a head.
The cockerel went round the whole of the village and every body who heard the message rushed to the square. When he thought e had informed every body, and was just making his way back to the square, the cockerel spotted the crab, without his head, meandering down a track on his way to the river bank. The cockerel advised him to make his way back to the square quickly, but crab just shrugged. "I am the secretary of the King", he said, "the King will keep a head for me, I am sure of it. I need to have a quick bath. I will see you bye and bye". And he sauntered on his way. At the village square where all the other animals had gathered, the elephant started giving out heads. He tried to make sure that each animal received a head that suited it. So the hippopotamus got a very large, fat head; the rhinocerus got a head with fierce looking eyes; the giraffe got a long head to go with his long neck. Nobody liked the hyena very much, so he got the ugliest head there was, but the antelope, who all thought was the most graceful of the animals, got the most beautiful head. This went on all morning until all the animals had their own head. Just as the King thanked the cockerel for his work, and was about to return to his palace, the crab came sauntering back. "Where have you been hiding out", asked the King. "I'm afraid all the heads have been given out, and there is not a single one left for you!" However much the crab protested, there was nothing to be done, and that is the reason why to this day the crab goes through life without a head.

Foolish Anansi thought he could trick a fisherman into doing his work for him. "Let's go fishing," he suggested.
"Very well," said the fisherman, who was clever and quite wise to Anansi's tricks. "I'll make the nets and you can get tired for me."
"Wait," said Anansi, "I'll make the nets and you can get tired for me!" Anansi made nets as his friend pretended to be tired. They caught four fish.
The fisherman said, "Anansi, you take these. I'll take tomorrow's catch. It might be bigger."
Greedily imagining the next day's catch, Anansi said, "No, you take these and I'll take tomorrow's fish."
But the next day, the nets were rotting away and no fish were caught. The fisherman said, "Anansi, take these rotten nets to market. You can sell them for much money."
When Anansi shouted, "Rotten nets for sale!" in the marketplace, people beat him with sticks.
'some partner you are," Anansi said to the fisherman as he rubbed his bruises. "I took the beatings. At least you could have taken the pain."
Anansi never tried to trick the fisherman again!

Turtles used to live on the land, they say, until the time a clever turtle was caught by some hunters. They brought him to their village and placed the turtle before the Chief, who said, "How shall we cook him?"
"You'll have to kill me first," said the turtle, "and take me out of this shell."
"We'll break your shell with sticks," they said.
"That'll never work," said the turtle, "Why don't you throw me in the water and drown me?!"
"Excellent idea," said the Chief. They took the turtle to the river and threw him into the water to drown him.
They were congratulating themselves on their success in drowning the turtle, when two little green eyes poked up in the water and the laughing turtle said, "Don't get those cooking pots out too fast, foolish people! As he swam away he said, "I think I'll spend most of my time from now on, safely in the water."
It has been that way ever since!

A great warrior did not return from the hunt. His family gave him up for dead, all except his youngest child who each day would ask, "Where is my father? Where is my father?"
The child's older brothers, who were magicians, finally went forth to find him. They came upon his broken spear and a pile of bones. The first son assembled the bones into a skeleton; the second son put flesh upon the bones; the third son breathed life into the flesh.
The warrior arose and walked into the village where there was great celebration. He said, "I will give a fine gift to the one who has brought me back to life."
Each one of his sons cried out, "Give it to me, for I have done the most."
"I will give the gift to my youngest child," said the warrior. "For it is this child who saved my life. A man is never truly dead until he is forgotten!"

Anansi the Spider hated to share! When Turtle came to his house at mealtime, he said, "I can't give you food until you've washed your dusty feet!"
Turtle licked his lips when he saw the big plate of steaming food, but politely walked to the stream to wash. When he returned, the plate was empty. "Good meal," Anansi said, patting his full stomach.
"One good meal deserves another!" said Turtle. "Come to my house for dinner tomorrow." Turtle fixed a fine dinner at the bottom of the river. "Come on down and eat!" he said.
Anansi filled his jacket pockets with stones so that he would be weighted down enough to stay at the river's bottom and eat. "It's impolite to wear a jacket to dinner!" Turtle said, "Take it off!"
But when greedy Anansi took off his jacket, he floated back up to the surface of the water and hungrily watched Turtle eat his fill!

Once there lived a cat. She thought, "The lion is the strongest of all the animals. It is good to have strong friends. I shall go to the lion and make friendship with him."
She did so and the lion and the cat were friends for many, many days.
Once they went for a walk together and met an elephant. The lion began to fight with the elephant and the elephant killed him.
The cat was very sorry. "What shall I do?" she thought.
"The elephant was stronger than the lion. I shall go to the elephant and make friendship with him."
She did so and they were friends for many, many days.
Once they went for a walk and met a hunter. The hunter shot at the elephant and killed him. The cat was sorry, but she thought, "The man is stronger than the elephant, I see."
So she went up to the hunter and asked, "May I go with you?"
"All right, let us go home together," he said.
They came to the man's home. His wife met him and took his gun from him.
The cat saw that and thought: "Oh, the woman is the strongest of all! She can take the hunter's gun from him, and he does not fight with her. He does not even say a word!" The man sat down at the table and the woman went to the kitchen.
The cat went to the kitchen, too. She decided to stay with the woman forever. That's why you always see a cat in the kitchen at a woman's feet.

Once upon a time there lived a poor man, Abhilas by name.
He was clever and often made jokes at rich people and even at the chief. So they did not like him and wanted to kill him.
Once the chief sent for Abhilas and he came to the chief's house.
"I hear that you are very clever, Abhilas! Can you build me a house in the sky in three days? You may have as many men as you need. If you can't do that my soldiers will kill you."
"I shall build it, my Chief," said Abhilas and went home.
He began to think. Then he made a kite and tied a bell and a long sting to it. When the wind blew, the kite rose high up in the air.
But it did not fly far, because Abhilas tied the string to a tree. The next day all the people of the town heard the bell and saw a dark spot in the sky.
The chief saw the spot, too. Abhilas came up to the chief and said" oh, my Chief, the house in the sky will soon be ready. Do you hear the bell? The workers are ringing the bell from the sky.
They need some boards for the roof of the house. Please tell your soldiers to climb up to the sky with the boards."
"But how will my soldiers climb up to the sky?" asked the chief.
"Oh, there is a way up," said Abhilas.
So the chief ordered his soldiers to get some boards and to follow Abhilas. They came to the tree and saw the string there. "This is the way to the sky," Abhilas said. "Climb up the string and you will come to the sky."
The soldiers tried to climb up the string, but could not do that. "Try again, try again! Our Chief will be very angry if you don't carry the boards up to his house in the sky!" said Abhilas.
Then the soldiers went to the chief and said, "Oh, Chief, no man can climb up to the sky!"
The chief thought a little and said, "That's right. Nobody can do that."
Then Abhilas said to the chief, "Oh, my Chief, if you know that, why do you ask me to build you a house in the sky?"
And the chief could give no answer to that. Abhilas went to the tree, cut the string and took away the kite.

When he was a strong young cat, he caught many mice.
The mice were afraid of him then. But in time he grew old and could not catch mice any more.
One day he decided to play a trick on the mice. He lay on his back and did not move at all.
A mouse saw him and thought he was dead. She ran to her friends and said, "The cat is dead! Let us dance and play!"
And all the mice began to dance and play. They were very happy. They danced and danced round the cat and the cat did not move.
Then one of the mice jumped on the cat's head. "Look at me! Come nearer, all of you! The bad cat is dead! Let us dance on his head!" But suddenly the cat jumped up and caught the silly mouse.
The other mice ran away as quickly as they could.
Mice! Don't forget! Never believe a cat!

Once, a chief told one of his servants to bring him the best meat from the market.
The servant brought him a tongue. The next day the chief told the servant to bring him the worst meat from the market.
The servant brought a tongue again. "What?" the chief said. "When I ask for the best meat, you bring a tongue and then you bring the same thing for the worst meat."
The servant said, 'sometimes a man is very unhappy because of his tongue and sometimes his tongue makes him very happy."
"You are right," the chief said. "Let us be masters of our tongue!

A jackal once got a thorn in his paw. "Oh, Oh!" he cried as he walked along a road in the forest. "What shall I do? What shall I do?"
Then he met an old woman: "Please, dear granny," he said, "Pull the thorn out of my paw."
The old woman pulled it out. The jackal thanked her and went away.
But in a minute he came back and asked: "Where is my thorn, Granny?"
"I don't know," answered the old woman. "Who needs a thorn?"
Then the jackal began to cry, "Oh, where is my thorn?" He cried. "I need it. I need it very much."
The old woman was sorry for the jackal and said, "Don't cry. Here is an egg for you."
The jackal took the egg and ran away with it. He came to a village and knocked at the door of the first house. A man opened it.
"Please, my good man," said the jackal, "May I stay the night with you? It is late and cold."
"Please come in," answered the man.
The jackal came in. "May I put my egg on this plate?" he asked.
"Yes, of course, you may."
In the night the jackal got up, ate up the egg and put the shell back on the plate. In the morning the jackal asked the man: "Where is my egg?"
"I don't know," was the answer.
Then the jackal began to cry, "Oh, my big, big egg!" he said. "Your cat ate it in the night. I am sure!" The man was sorry for the jackal and gave him a hen instead of the egg.
The jackal took the hen and ran away with it. He ran and ran and came to the next village in the evening. There he knocked at the first door and asked the woman who opened the door.
"May I stay the night with you, please? It is so cold outside!"
"Please, come in, little jackal," said the woman.
"And where can I put my hen?" the jackal asked.
"Let the hen stay with our goat," the woman said.
In the night the jackal got up, went to the place where the goat was and ate up the hen. In the morning he said to the woman, "Let us go and get my hen."
But there was no hen, of course. There were only feathers and bones on the ground. The jackal began to cry, "Oh, my hen, my beautiful grey hen! Your goat ate it up in the night!"
The woman was sorry for the jackal and gave him one of the goat's kids instead of the hen. The jackal thanked the woman and ran away.
He ran and ran and he came to another village. It was all most evening and he knocked at the first house, "May I stay the night in your house?" he asked the man
who opened the door. "I am very, very tired."
"Please come in," the man said.
"Where may I put my little kid?" the jackal asked.
"Tie it to the end of my son's bed," the man said.
At night the jackal ate up the kid and put its bones on the boy's bed.
In the morning he asked the man. "Where is my little kid?"
They went up to the boy's bed. But there were only horns and bones instead of the kid.
"Oh, my little kid, my dear little kid! Your son ate it in the night, I am sure," said the jackal and began to cry.
The man said, "Don't cry. I shall give you a big goat instead of your little kid."
"No, No, I don't want the goat! Give me your son!"
"All right, go out and wait a little at the door," said the man.
Then the man brought him a big bag and said: "Here is the boy. He is in the bag. Good bye!"
The jackal took the bag and went away quickly. He tried to run. But he couldn't run. The bag was very heavy.
"This is a very big boy," the jackal thought. "Or perhaps it is not a boy. Perhaps the man put stones into the bag! I shall open it and see.' He opened the bag and two big dogs jumped out of it! In a minute they tore the jackal to pieces."

Long, long ago in Africa there lived a hunter. His name was Ogalussa.
Once he went to the forest to hunt and his wife with their five sons went to the field work.
The family came home in the evening. But Ogalussa was not yet back. The family waited and waited for him. But he didn"t come. They had their supper without him.
Night came. Then morning came. Then again night came. But Ogalussa did not come home. A week passed. A month passed.
And after a sixth son was born to Ogalussa's wife. Puli was his name. Ogalussa did not come back. Every day Ogalussa's wife worked in the field. Sometimes the sons helped her. Sometimes they went to the forest to hunt. Some time later the family forgot about Ogalussa.
The youngest son Puli could already walk. But he could not talk. But one day he opened his little mouth and began to talk. His first words were, "Where is my father?" Where is our father?" asked the eldest brother, too.
"We must go to the forest and look for him," said the second brother.
"There is the path he walked along," said the third brother.
"Let us go along that path and I am sure we shall find him," said the fourth brother.
"Let us go at once!" those were the fifth brother's words.
And the five sons took their guns and went along the path.
The path was long, very long. At last they came to a place where they saw Ogalussa's bones and his old gun on the ground.
The eldest son said, "I can put the bones together."
And he put the bones together as they are in a man's body.
Then the second brother said, "I can cover the bones with skin."
And he covered Ogalussa's bones with skin.
The third brother said, "I can fill his body with blood."
And he did his work well.
Then the fourth brother said, ''1 shall make him breath."
In a few minutes Ogalussa began to breath
And the fifth brother made him stand up.
Ogalussa stood up, opened his eyes and asked, "Where is my gun?"
The sons gave him his old gun and they went home together.
At home he washed himself, cut his hair (the people who come back from the Land of the Dead must cut their hair), had his dinner and then rested for some days. All the family were very happy. And so were his neighbours. Ogalussa called his neighbours to a feast and killed a cow.
His wife cooked the meat for the feast and Ogalussa made a whip out of the cow's tail. He put some bright beads on it and the whip was very nice. The feast began. All the people came dressed in their best clothes. Musicians played,
the people danced and sang. All were very happy.
Ogalussa showed his new whip to the guests. "This is the nicest of all the whips," they said. Many of the guests ask Ogalussa to give them the whip. But Ogalussa did not give it to the guests.
Then he began to speak, "Long, long ago I went to the forest to hunt. A strong lion killed me. I was dead for a long time. Then my sons found my bones and brought me back to life. Now I am here among you. I am very thankful to my sons! Look here, my dear guests, I have a whip and you say it is the nicest of all the whips. But I have only one whip! I shall give it to the son who helped me most of all to come back from the Land of the Dead."
Then all the people began to think, "Who helped most of all?"
It was not so easy to tell! At last Ogalussa said, "I shall give the whip to little Puli His first words were, 'Where is my father? Thanks to him my sons went to the forest to look for me. Thanks to Puli I am here with you and my family."
And he kissed the little boy. All the people said, "Ogulussa, you are right!"
And even in our days African people say, "A man is alive as long as you remember him."

There was one place in the Seven Hills which the animals liked very much.
There was good water and green grass. But a strong lion lived there. He killed two or three animals every day.
One day the animals came to the Lion and one of them began to speak, "Oh, dear Lion, it is not good for you to run and hunt all day long in the Seven Hills. We'll send you one animal for your dinner every day."
"All right," the Lion said, "but you must begin to send me my dinner now. I am hungry. I must have my dinner every day! If you don't send an animal to me every day, I shall kill as many of you as I want!"
"Don't kill us, dear Lion. We shall send you an animal every day."
They cast lots and that day it was an antelope who became the Lion's dinner. And every day they sent one animal to the Lion.
But the animals were not happy. Each of them thought, "Oh, tomorrow my turn will come!"
One day it was a Hare's turn to be the Lion's dinner. But the Hare was not unhappy. He smiled! "That's good, very good?" the hare said. "Don't be afraid! The Lion will not eat me up!"
The Hare ran to the river, jumped into the water and then began to roll in the mud. He came to the Lion very dirty.
The Lion saw him and became angry. "But I don't want that dirty animal for my dinner," he cried. "Oh, dear Lion, I am not your dinner. I had to bring you a big hare. But on my way I met another lion and he took the hare for himself. "
"Is there another lion in the Seven Hills?" asked the Lion.
"Yes, there is. He is big and strong. I think he is stronger than you are."
The Lion became angrier than before and said to the Hare, 'show me that lion!"
"All right!" said the Hare. "Let us go to him."
And they went to a big well. The Hare looked into the well and said,
"Look, he is there and the Hare is with him."
The Lion looked into the well. He saw himself and the Hare in the water. He jumped into the well to catch them and never came back!
The animals were happy. They jumped and danced and thanked the clever Hare.

Long ago there lived a king.
Writers, poets and musicians came from many places to see him.
The king liked to hear their stories, poems and music. But there was one man whom the king liked better than the others. His name was Mahamood.
He knew many tricks, sang funny songs and danced well. He could make the king laugh and the people called Mahamood the Fool of The King.
There was one thing that the king did not like in Mahamood. He ate very much. This little man ate from morning till night.
The king thought, "My poor Mahamood will die soon if he eats so much."
Then he called together all his ministers and servants and said, "Listen to me. For one day you must not give Mahamood anything to eat.
Do not give him wine, nor fruit, nor meat. Do not give him even a piece of bread! He must not sit at my table. He must not have anything to eat the whole day."
"Oh, yes, my King, that's right. He is too fat," said one of the ministers. So the next day there was no place for Mahamood at the king's table.
He went to the wall and stood there. He thought, "I shall wait. Soon the servants will bring me food and drink."
But the servants did not bring him anything. He did not ask for food, because he was afraid of the king.
"If a man makes the king angry, that man will die," he thought.
Poor Mahamood was very hungry. Then one of the servants dropped a little piece of bread.
Mahamood quickly picked it up. Now I have something to eat," he thought. 'I shall eat it when the king is not looking at me."
When dinner was over, the poets read their poems, the musicians played and the dancing girls began their beautiful dances.
"Now the king is watching the dancing girls," thought Mahamood, "I shall eat my piece of bread." But the king was watching Mahamood all the time.
He asked the musicians to stop, called Mahamood to come to him and asked, "I hear that you have a donkey. Where did you get It?"
"I bought it in Tripoli, my King!" answered Mahamood. "Oh, I see," said the king.
So the musicians were playing and the girls were dancing. Then Mahamood wanted to eat his piece of bread. But the king asked him to come nearer and said.
"How much did you pay for your donkey in Tripoli?"
Mahamood put the bread in his pocket quickly and answered. 'sixteen gold coins, my King." The king went on like this all the afternoon.
When Mahamood tried to eat his piece of bread, the king always asked him a question. At last evening came. Mahamood could not stand. He was so hungry and tired.
When the feast was over,
Mahamood ran to the kitchen, but the kitchen was locked and Mahamood had only his small piece of bread to eat.
He ate it up and went to his room. But he could not sleep. He was very hungry.
Then he ran to the king's room. He knocked at the door. The king asked angrily, "Who is knocking at my door so late?"
"Oh, my King," said Mahamood. "I am sorry, but I must tell you that I did not buy my donkey in Tripoli, but in Benghazi."
The king thanked him and told him to go away.
A few minutes later Mahamood knocked at the door again. "Oh, my King, but I told you a lie this afternoon. I did not pay sixteen gold coins for the donkey. I paid twenty gold coins for it."
"Oh, you fool," cried the angry king. "I shall cut off your head for your silly tales about the donkey and give your body to the jackals!"
Mahamood listened to the king and smiled: "Oh, yes, I know that. But before I die may I say my last wish? Only one wish!"
"What is your last wish?" asked the king.
"My last wish is to have a good supper."
The king understood everything. He laughed and told his servants to bring the best food to his room. He sat down at the table with Mahamood.
They ate and laughed until morning came. After that Mahamood was never without food. And he was always happy.

This is a story about a boy. His name was Anansi.
There was a great famine in the country where Anansi lived.
Anansi and his little brothers and sisters were very hungry. The boy could not think of anything but food.
"This hunger will kill me!" he often said.
One day he went out of the house and walked to the seashore. "I shall try to catch a little fish," he thought.
He sat on the seashore watching, watching, watching - but nothing came. Then suddenly he saw a green island in the sea.
Anansi climbed into a little red boat. And soon he came to the green island.
He got out of the boat, stood under the tree and looked up at big nuts high above him. He tried to climb up the tree and get the nuts, but that was not easy.
He tried again and again. But he could not get the nuts. The nuts were laughing at him! "I'll get you, my dear nuts!" he said. And he tried again and again to get the nuts.
At last he got one nut. "Now I have you!" he cried. He tried to throw it into his little boat, but the nut fell into the sea.
"Well, there are many more nuts in the tree," said Anansi. But the second nut fell into the sea, too. Seven times that happened.
Seven good big nuts were in the sea! The wind carried them far far away. The boy cried and cried. But nuts have no ears! They did not come back. Then Anansi went to the forest. He saw a little house there. An old man came out of the house.
"What do you want here, my boy?" asked the old man. "Do not be afraid of me. Tell me everything."
So Anansi told him about the famine and about his hungry people. Then he told the old man about the nuts and cried again.
The old man took Anansi's hand and said, "Don't cry, my boy! I have something for you. It is better than nuts." He went into his house and brought a little pot.
"Take it home and give it to your mother. Now you and your people will never be hungry. When your mother wants to make dinner for her family, she must only say: 'Pot, pot, what you did for the old man, please do for me!"
Anansi thanked him and went quickly away. He came to the little boat, got in, and said at once, "Pot, pot, what you did for the old man, please do for me!"
And the pot gave him a good dinner. Anansi ate it all and was strong again. He soon came home. But he did not want to give the pot to his mother. "It is my pot. I shall have it and eat when I want to."
So Anansi put the pot in some dark place of the house and spoke to it when nobody was at home. Every day his mother and his brothers and sisters went out to look for food.
Anansi did not go with them. He said, "Oh, I am ill. I cannot go."
When he was at home alone, he ran to his pot and the pot gave him a good dinner.
Anansi's brothers and sisters grew thinner and thinner every day. But Anansi grew fatter and fatter.
"Why is he so fat?" one of his brothers asked one day. "I think he has a secret. I shall find it out."
And the next day he did not go out to look for food with his mother. He stayed at home.
Anansi thought that nobody was at home, took his
pot and said, "Pot, pot, what you did for the old man, please do for me!"
And the pot gave him a good dinner.
His brother listened to the words. Now he knew about the pot and he told his mother about it. The poor woman began to cry.
"I have a bad son!" she cried.
That day she told Anansi to go out of the house together with the other children. She stayed at home and asked the pot to give her dinner.
"How happy my children will be when they come home!" she thought.
Anansi came home with the other children. Their mother gave them dinner.
But Anansi said, "I am very ill. I cannot eat it. I shall go to bed."
But he did not go to bed. He went to the place where the pot was. But the pot was not there! The next day his mother went to the village square with the pot in the hands.
She stopped there and began to beat the pot with a little stick. Many people came to the place. Then she said, "Pot, pot, what you did for the old man, please do for me."
And the pot gave her food! The woman spoke to the pot many times and the pot gave the food to the hungry people. But when she spoke to the pot for the fiftieth time, the pot melted away.
There was nothing on the ground in front of the poor woman. Anansi was very angry. He decided to go to the old man again and tell him everything.
"He will give me another pot," he thought.
When Anansi came to the seashore, the little red boat was there. He got into it and soon he came to the old man's house. The old man listened to Anansi's story.
"I have no pot to give you, my boy, but I'll give you this stick. You say the same words to it, only instead of pot, pot say stick."
Anansi took the stick and ran to the boat. He could not wait a minute. He said quickly, 'stick, stick, what you did for the old man, please do for me!"
And the stick did! It beat him on the back, on his fat face, on his fat hands and legs.
It beat all his fat body! He did not know what to do. He jumped into the water and swam away as quickly as he could. He left the boat with the stick in it.
He came home crying like a small child. But he did not tell anybody about the stick. But that was a good lesson to him.
People say that now everything he gets he shares with his brothers and sisters and with other people, too.

There grew a big tree on the seashore.
Half of its branches were over the land and the other half over the water.
A little Monkey lived in the tree. He played in the branches all day and when he was hungry, he ate the sweet fruit that grew in the tree. Now, in the sea there lived a Shark.
One day the Monkey threw some of the fruit into the sea. The Shark ate it up. From that day on the Shark and the Monkey were friends and the Shark asked the monkey to throw some fruit down to him every day.
"Thank you, friend Monkey," said the Shark, "I have only fish to eat in the sea and I like your fruit very much."
The Monkey was happy to be a friend of the Shark and threw fruit into the sea every morning. Once, the Shark said to the Monkey, "You are so good to me that I want to do something good for you."
The Monkey looked down at the Shark and listened. The Shark said, "I want to show you my home. You will meet my brothers and sisters. You are so good to me that I think they will like you."
The Monkey thought a minute and said, "No, I don't want to go. Thank you. I am afraid of cold water. And I cannot swim. I shall be happier if I stay in my tree."
"Oh, no, no!" said the Shark. "Don't be afraid! Come with me. I shall carry you to my home on my back. I shall not swim very quickly."
The Monkey thought, "The day is very hot. It will be nice on the water. I think I'll go."
So the Monkey sat down on the Shark's back. And they went off.
At first the Monkey did not like going on the Shark's back, because the Shark swam very quickly. But soon he liked it and looked at the new places and at the fish in the water. It was so interesting!
"Do you like the sea?" asked the Shark. "Is the sea better than your forest?"
"Yes, it is. How far must we go?" asked the Monkey.
"It is not very far," the Shark answered. "And now I must tell you something. Our chief, the biggest shark in the sea, is very ill. Our doctor said to him, 'You must eat a monkey's heart. Then you will be well again.'
So I am taking you to him and I am telling it to you, because you are my friend."
The poor Monkey was ready to cry. But he did not cry. The Monkey thought of a plan to save himself. Then he said, "How silly you are! Why didn't you tell me that before? I have no heart with me. It is at home, in the branches of a big tree. We Monkeys always hide our hearts in the branches of big trees in the daytime. We take out hearts only at night.
What will you do if your chief finds that I have no heart? How angry he will be? I am ready to give my heart to your chief, because I am your friend. But how can I do that when I have no heart with me?"
The Shark asked the Monkey, "If I take you back to your tree, will you go and get your heart?"
"Of course, I will. And let us go quickly. Your dear chief must not wait!"
The Shark with the Monkey swam back very quickly. They came again to the big tree. The Monkey climbed up the tree saying, "Wait for me! Wait for me! I'll take my heart!"
But the monkey did not come back. The Shark was swimming and swimming in the water under the tree. Then he shouted, "Friend Monkey, where are you?"
There was no answer. The Shark thought, "I am afraid he can't find the heart in the branches!"
The Shark waited and waited for the Monkey. Then he shouted again, "Monkey? Monkey? When will you come back to me?"
Again there was no answer. Then the Monkey began to laugh.
"Do you think I am a fool?" asked the little Monkey. "Do you think I want to give my heart to your big bad chief and then die?"
"But you said your heart was in the branches of the tree," said the silly Shark.
"My heart is in its place in my body. It is always there!" shouted the Monkey. "And you go away! We are not friends any more!"
And with these words the clever Monkey threw a big rotten fruit on the Shark's nose.

A man bought a sheep and went home with it.
A Hare saw him and thought, "What a good sheep that is! I must have it for myself. "
The Hare ran quickly in front of them, took off his left shoe, put it on the road and hid himself in the bushes.
The man saw the shoe and said to himself, "This is a good shoe, but I don't need one shoe, I shall not take it."
The Hare put on his left shoe, ran quickly on, took off his right shoe and put it on the road.
The man came up to the second shoe, stopped there and said, "Oh, this is the right shoe and the other one was the left shoe. I shall go back and take the left shoe and then I shall have good new shoes."
He tied his sheep to a tree near the road, put the shoe near the sheep and walked back to find the first shoe.
He looked and looked for the shoe, but could not find it. While the man was looking for the left shoe, the Hare took the right shoe, untied the sheep and took it to his home.
When the man came back, he found no sheep and no shoe.
He cried out, "What a fool I am!"
And he was right.

There was a time when some birds and some animals lived in the sky. The Dog and the Hen lived there, too.
One day it was very cold and rainy in the sky. The birds asked the Dog to go down to the earth and bring some fire to make the sky warm.
The Dog went down and came to a man's house. He saw many bones near the house. He began to eat the bones and forgot the birds and the fire.
The birds waited and waited for the Dog, but he did not come back. He decided to live with the man.
As it was still cold, the birds sent the Hen down to bring some fire.
The Hen went to a man's house and saw some seeds near the house. She liked the seeds very much.
The Hen did not think about the fire, but ate up the seeds. And she decided to live with the man, too.
That's why the birds and the animals do not like the dog and the hen. They left their friends in the cold for the sake of good food.
Now you know how the dog and the hen became domestic animals.

Once there lived an old woman. She had two donkeys.
Every morning she went with them down the street to the fields.
One morning two young men saw the old woman with her donkeys and shouted.
"Good morning, mother of donkeys!"
"Good morning, my sons," the old woman answered and smiled at them.

One day, a very long time ago, some of Naayire people went hunting.
They walked and walked in the bush but found nothing. When night came, they were very far from home.
"We must sleep in the bush," the chief sad, "we must find a good place to sleep."
The hunters were not afraid to sleep in the bush. But they knew elephants, lions and other animals sometimes killed sleeping hunters. And there were some bad people, too, in the bush.
The hunters came to a place with big trees round it. They decided to rest and sleep on the grass.
They did not make a fire and ate only some nuts which they carried in their bags. That was their supper. Then they went to sleep. All of them were tired.
They slept soundly and did not hear anything. They did not hear that their enemies were coming nearer and nearer to them.
But in one of the trees above the sleeping men something moved and fell down on the head of a young hunter. He jumped up and cried a big python was on his head! :
The Naayire hunters got up quickly and saw the enemies round them. A fight began. Soon the enemies ran away and that was the end of the fight.
The Naayire hunters came up to their chief to talk about the fight.
"What made you jump up?" the chief asked the young hunter.
"It was a python," he said. "It fell on my head, but it did not kill me."
Then the chief said, "From this day on our people will never kill a python. That python saved our lives. Pythons will be sacred animals in our country."
Even today the Naayire people love pythons. If you go into their houses in the rainy season, you will find a python there.
The pythons never harm anyone. They don't eat even the chickens.

"Don't go near the well! Don't play round it!" Mother Hen said to her children. And they never came to the well.
But once a little chicken ran to the well and stopped there. "Why is the well so bad?" he thought. "I am here and everything is all right with me. Let me see what is in the well.
And he jumped up to look into it. And what did he see there?
He saw another chicken! Our chicken turned his head. The chicken in the well did the same. The chicken jumped. So did the chicken in the well.
He became angry with the chicken in the well and decided to have a fight with him. He jumped down into the well. But there was no chicken to fight with, but only water and water.
He cried, "Help me, help me!" But nobody heard him. He went down under the cold water and nobody saw him again.

One a chief decided to give a feast for his people. He sent his men to every village.
They told the people to come to the chief's house and said, "The Chief asks each of the men to bring one bottle of palm wine and pour it into a pot at the door."
The day of the feast came. People put on their best clothes and walked to the chief's house with their families.
They stopped at the door of the chief's house and poured their bottles into a very big pot at the door.
There was a man who wanted to go to the feast very much. But he had no palm wine at home. His wife said to him, "You must buy some palm wine."
But the man answered, "What? No. I don't want to buy wine for a feast that is free. No. No!"
He thought a little and then said, "Hundreds of people will bring their Wine and pour it into the pot. A bottle of water cannot be bad for so much wine."
And so he went to the feast with a bottle of water. He poured his bottle into the pot as other people did. Then he sat down at the table with all the other people and waited for the glass of palm wine which he liked so much.
The chief said, "Let's drink wine, dear guests!" All the guests took their glasses. But what they drank was not palm wine, but water!
So our man was not the only one who thought, "A bottle of water cannot be bad for so much wine."

Long, long ago the chief of the Dagomba people had a son.
He loved the boy so much that he could not sleep if the boy was not near him at night.
One evening the chief sat under a big tree near his house. Some Dagombas sat around him.
That night was warm and there was no rain. One could hear the tom-tom of the drums. Children sang and danced near them.
"Life is good," the chief said. And the people clapped their hands. The Dagomba people always clap their hands when they agree with somebody or something.
Then the chief's wife came up to the chief and said, "Oh Chief, It is time for our boy to sleep."
"But he is with you, in the house," the chief said.
"Isn't he here, with you?" the woman asked.
"Woman, I tell you, he is not with me. Go and look for him."
"Oh, my dear Chief," the wife said sadly. "He is not in our house."
The Chief stood up quickly and cried, 'stop the dance! Let the drummers go and drum asking for my son."
In a minute the drums began their talk. "The Chiefs child is lost," they said. "Who finds the child must bring him to the Chief."
All the people ran from place to place and looked for the boy.
But they did not find him. The chief was very angry. He said "All my people must help to find the boy."
And the people looked and looked for the boy. They were looking for the boy for many hours. Then a man cried out: "Here he is!"
The chief came up to the man. There, under a tree on the grass, the boy was sleeping.
"Get up, my dear," the chief said to his little son. But the boy did not hear him.
"Get up," said his father again. Then the boy opened his eyes.
"Father," he said and got up. And they walked off together.
The chief was very happy.
The drums began their talk again. "The Chiefs son is here!
The Chiefs soil is here!" they said.
Then the chief looked back angrily at the tree.
"Bum that tree! It hid my son from me!"
And the chief's servants put their torches to its trunk and branches.
The tree began to bum and soon fell on the grass.
At the same time the happy father went home with his son.
The people ran after them with songs and dances. :
From that day on every year in July, the Dagomba people have their fire Festival. The chief goes out of his house and the people light their torches. They begin to dance and put their torches to tree trunks.
But today they bum only two or three branches and not the whole tree.

Long Long ago, there was a lake of cold water in Kenya.
Many animals came at night to the lake to drink some water. But people never came to the lake at night. The animals could kill and eat them.
Now, a rich man who had a beautiful daughter once said, "The young man, who will go to the lake in the evening and stay in the cold water till morning, will have my daughter for his wife."
There lived a poor young man who loved the rich man's daughter very much. He said to his mother, "I shall try to stay all night in the lake and then marry my dear girl."
"No, No," the mother said, "you are my only son! The water in the lake is very cold and the animals will eat you up. Don't go there!"
She cried and cried. But her son said, "Mother, don't cry. I must try. I love her so much!" So the young man went to the girl's father. He told him that he wanted to go to the lake and stay in the cold water all night.
The rich man sent his servants to a place where they could watch the young man.
When night came, the young man went to the lake and his mother followed him. But he did not see her. There was a hill forty paces away from the place where the young man went into the water.
The woman climbed up the hill and made a fire there. The wild animals saw the fire and were afraid to go near that place.
The young man saw the fire, too. He understood that his mother was there. He thought of his mother's love and it was easier for him to stay all night in the very cold water. Morning came.
The young man went to the rich man's house. The rich man saw him and said, "My servants say that there was a fire on a hill forty paces from the lake. It warmed you and that is why you could stay all night in the water. So you cannot marry my daughter. Good-bye."
The young man was very angry. He went to the judge. "Well," the judge said, "this is a very simple case."
The next morning the young man with his mother and the rich man with his servants came before
the Judge. There were many people there who wanted to hear the case.
The judge asked for a pot of cold water. Then he walked forty paces from the pot and made a fire.
"Now," he said, "we shall wait a little until the water is warm."
The people cried, "But the fire is so far away, it cannot warm the water in the pot."
Then the judge said, "And how could that young man warm himself at a fire forty paces away?"
So the case was over and the young man married the rich man's daughter. They lived happily for many years.

Once there lived a Frog who had two wives.
His first wife lived in Dumbi and the second wife lived in Dala. He himself lived in a little place between Dumbi and Dala.
He went sometimes to Dumbi and sometimes to Dala to see his wives.
Once a little frog came to him and said, "Come to Dumbi, please! Your first wife has a nice pudding for you. Come at once while the pudding is hot!" The Frog was very happy, because he liked puddings very much.
He was ready to go when another little frog came up to him and said, "Please, come to Dala! Your second wife has a nice pudding for you. Come at once while the pudding is hot!"
The Frog sat down and began to think.
"If I go to my first wife for the pudding, my second wife will be sorry and angry. If I go to my second wife for the pudding, my first wife will be sorry and angry, too. Where shall I go to Dumbi or to Dala?"
He sat and thought for a long time. And he stayed at home and began to cry "oh! Where shall I go, where shall I go?" Now, when you hear frogs gaou, gaou, gaou, you will understand that it means: "Where shall I go? Where shall I go? Go Go Go?" How bad it is to have two wives who make puddings at the same time."

Zakia was a beautiful and clever girl. She lived with her father.
She was so clever that her father always asked her advice. But once he did not ask her advice and Zakia was very angry.
This was when the king asked the girl's father to let him marry her.
Zakia's father did not tell his daughter about that and said to the king, "Oh, my King, my daughter will be very glad to marry you!"
But Zakia was not glad. "No, Father," she said, "no, no! I will not marry and love a man whom I do not know."
"Oh, my dear daughter," said her father. "If you don't marry him, he may be very angry! But he is very good and clever. Oh, please, do as I say!"
At last Zakia said, "All right. I'll marry him. But the King must learn a trade. I'll marry him only if he does so.
One day he may lose his throne and what shall we do then? We shall be poor, we shall die of hunger. Go to the King and tell him my wish."
Zakia's father went to the king and told him his daughter's wish. And the king smiled and said, "Your daughter is not only beautiful but very clever, too. I'll be glad to do as she asks. I am sure that we shall be happy together."
So the king began to learn the trade of a weaver. Soon he could weave a beautiful handkerchief and he sent it to Zakia as a present.
"If she likes my present, she will marry me, I am sure," he thought.
Zakia liked the handkerchief and said, "Now I see that he loves me."
In a month they married and began to live happily. Zakia often helped the king with her clever advice.
One day the king came to his wife. "I want to know my people," he said. "How can I learn what they think? How can I learn what they want?"
Zakia thought for a minute and then said, "My King, if a man wishes to know another man well, he must live with him or meet him often. I think you must put on the same clothes as our people have and meet them in the streets of our city."
"I like your advice," the king said and the next day he was walking along the streets with two of his ministers. Then dinner time came.
"We shall not go home for dinner," the king said, "Let us go to a cafe where people eat."
So they came to a small cafe in a little street. But when they came into the room, the floor slipped away beneath their feet and they found themselves under the floor. They began to shout, but nobody came to help them.
"A nice welcome for the King! Where are we? And why are we here?" said the king angrily. Suddenly they heard a laugh and they saw the ugly face of an old man above them.
"Ha! Ha! Ha! In three days I shall kill you and your meat will make a nice dish for our cafe. Everybody likes our cafe for its very good dishes! Ha, ha, ha!"
With these words the man went. "Let us tell him who we are when he comes back,"
said one of ministers. "Oh, no," said the king. "If he knows that, he will kill us today. Give me time to think. "
And he sat down by the wall and thought. Some hours later the ugly man came back to them. "Here is some water for you to drink. But I shall not give you any food. You are fat enough."
Then the king said, "If we must die, we must. But I want to tell you something. You may get much money for it."
"I like money very much," said the ugly man. "Go on!"
"I am a weaver and the King's wife likes my work very much. I shall weave a handkerchief and you will take it to her. You will get more money for it than for the good dishes in your café. I am sure."
The ugly old man brought down a loom and thread and the king began to work. He made a beautiful handkerchief for Zakia. The old man took the handkerchief and went to the king's wife with it.
It was not easy to get to her, but at last the servants let him, "I have a very beautiful handkerchief," said the old man to the king's wife. "Look at it, please. A Good weaver made it. Will you buy it?"
Zakia understood at once that the king was in trouble.
"Yes, it is a very beautiful handkerchief," she said. "I like it and I'll buy it."
Zakia bought the handkerchief, but she told her servants to follow the old man and she followed the servants on horseback. They came to the cafe and went in. Zakia waited in the street. Very soon a fight began in the cafe.
At last the king and his two ministers were free. They came out of the cafe. "My dear Zakia," said the king when he saw her. "You have saved my life. I love you more than anyone in the world!" Zakia was happy to hear these words and the king and his wife went home.

Long, long ago there lived an old woman who sold the best soup in the market.
It was chicken soup.
Nobody knew the old woman's name. Nobody knew where she lived.
No body knew why her soup was always the best in the market and why it was so hot.
But people did not think about that. They bought the soup and ate it.
Every morning the old woman came to the market square. She carried a big black pot of hot chicken soup on her head. Then she sat down under a tree and it did not take her long to sell her soup.
There lived a small boy not far from the market square. His name was Kalari. He liked the soup very much. He wanted to know where the old woman came from.
One day when the old woman put her empty pot on her head and left the market square. Kalari followed her. But she did not see him.
They went a long, long way. They climbed up a high hill. Evening came. Kalari was afraid. But he went on.
At last the woman came to a little hut on that high hill. There stood a very large pot. "How big the pot is," thought Kalari.
The woman went into the hut. Kalari went up to the pot and looked into it. It was empty. Then the woman came out of the hut.
Kalari quickly hid himself. The woman came up to the large pot. Then she began to sing.
Magic pot, magic pot make hot soup for me. Make hot soup for me.
Make soup with Chicken. Make soup with Chicken.
Make this soup for me to sell. Make this soup for me to sell.
And for people to buy and for people to buy…
Magic pot, magic pot!
Very soon the soup was ready. Steam came out of the pot. The smell of the soup was very good and Kalari was very hungry.
Then the old woman went back into her hut. Kalari came up to the pot. He looked under it. There was no fire there. But the pot was full of hot chicken soup!
"I must have some of it. I am so hungry!" Kalari said to himself and put his hand into the pot to take a piece of chicken. But suddenly the old woman came out of her hut. She saw Kalari with his hand in the pot.
"Oh, oh,
oh!" she cried. "Oh, oh, oh!"
Kalari ran down the hill as quickly as he could. The old woman ran after him. But she could not catch him. Kalari ran and ran and at last came home.
He told his parents about the old woman on the hill and her magic pot. They looked at the hill and saw steam there.
Yes, we see the steam of the magic pot," they said.
From that day on the old woman stopped coming to the market with her soup. Nobody went up that high hill to see her. They were afraid of the old woman.
But now, when people see clouds round the hill, they say, "Look! There is the steam from the magic pot."

Once upon a time there lived a chief who liked to listen to stories. And he knew so many stories that sometimes he stopped the story-teller and finished the story himself.
One day the chief sent his servants everywhere to find a good story-teller.
"Our Chief will give many presents to the man who will tell him the longest story in the world and make him laugh."
The servants shouted in the streets. Many people came to the chief and told him very long stories. They tried to make him laugh. But nobody could do that.
The chief always said, "That is not the longest story and there is nothing to laugh at."
Once a boy came to the chief and said, "Oh, my Chief, let me try to tell you the longest story in the world and make you laugh."
The chief said, "Well, sit down and begin your story!" The boy began.
Long, long ago there lived a man, Mogambo by name. He ate so much that no man could feed him full. The chief of that country heard about Mogambo and said, 'Bring him to me. I shall feed him full.' And he ordered his people to bring hundreds of thousands of pots of soup, meat and fruit.
Hundreds of camels carried the pots on their backs. The camels stopped in front of the chief's house. Many people came to see Mogambo's dinner.
Then Mogambo came. The drummers began to drum. The musicians began to play. And the people sang songs.
Mogambo made a bow to the chief and said to the people, 'Now look at me! Look at me! Look at me!' With these words Mogambo began to eat soup. And he ate. And he ate. And he ate. And he ate. And he ate.
"Well, what then?" asked the chief, "He ate. And he ate. And what then?"
"Oh, my chief," answered the boy, "this is only the first pot and there were many thousands of pots! Wait a little. And he ate. And he ate. And he ate.
Evening came. The boy went on with his story. "And he ate. And he ate. And he ate. "
At last the chief ordered him to stop till the next morning. In the morning the chief asked the boy to go on with his story.
"Now what can you tell
us about your Mogambo?" he asked.
"Oh, my Chief, he not only ate, but drank too, so he drank and then he ate and he ate and he ate."
The story-teller said louder and louder, "and he ate and he ate and he ate."
The chief looked at the boy and began to laugh.
"Well, my boy, your story is the longest in the world! Have a rest now! Stop!"
And the young story-teller stopped his story, got many presents from the chief, climbed up on a camel and rode away with these words: "And he ate, and he ate, and he ate"

There was once a big cave.
The top part of the cave was dry and there was water in the bottom part of it.
Many animals lived in the dry part and a crocodile lived in the bottom part of it.
He liked to lie in the water and sleep. Sometimes he came out of the cave for a short time.
One day a hunter with his bow and arrow came near the cave. He saw the crocodile and decided to kill him. He aimed at the crocodile. But he became blind at once.
The hunter dropped his arrow and he began to see again! He saw the smiling crocodile of course. The crocodile was happy! The hunter aimed at the crocodile a second time and again he became blind.
Then the hunter ran back to the village where he lived and told the people about the crocodile. "As I aimed at him I became blind. The arrow fell out of my bow and then I could see again," he said.
The people of the village did not believe him. Many of them took their bows and arrows and went off to the cave. They saw the crocodile. He was lying in the sun near the cave. They aimed at him and became blind.
"Take your arrows from your bows," the hunter cried. They did so and could see again! It was clear that the crocodile was a magic crocodile.
"No man can kill me," thought the happy crocodile and went back to the cave. The other animals in the cave were happy, too.
The magic crocodile did not let the hunters kill them and of course. They said "thank you" to the crocodile.
Many young men came to the cave and tried to kill the crocodile. But nobody could do it with bows and arrows.
In those days hunters knew nothing about the guns. The first hunter with a gun in his hands killed our crocodile.
The crocodile's magic worked
only against bows and arrows. It did not work against guns.

A man had to go on a long travel.
He hid his money in a pot and put butter over it. So nobody could see what was there under the butter in the pot.
Then he took the pot to his neighbor and said, "Please keep this pot of butter for me till I come back." He did not say anything about the money in the pot.
A month passed. Two months passed. But the traveler did not come back. His neighbor thought, "I'm afraid the butter in the pot is bad."
And he took all the butter out of the pot and saw money there.
He took the money for himself and put many small stones into the pot in place of the money. When the traveler came back, he asked his neighbor for the pot.
He carried it home and took out all the butter. He wanted to take the money. But he found only many small stones under the butter.
He was very angry. Then one of his friends came to see him. "You look angry, my friend! Why are you angry?" asked his friend.
"Oh, I am a silly man!" And he told his friend the story about the pot of butter, the money and the small stones.
"Well, I can show you how to get your money back. Let us go to the forest."
And the two friends went to the forest, caught a monkey there and brought it home.
"Now you go to your neighbor and say, 'Please let your son come with me to the market. He can help me to carry food from the market."
The man did so. The neighbor sent his son to the man. But they did not go to the market. The man went home with the neighbor's son and locked the boy in his house.
The friend said, "Now go to your neighbor with the monkey and say: 'Here is your son."
The man did so. The neighbor was very angry.
"Take the monkey away and bring back my son!" he said.
"Why, this is your son! If money can turn into small stones then a boy can turn into a monkey."
The neighbor
understood everything. He brought the money and the man let the boy go back to his father.
The man thanked his clever friend very much. He wanted to give him a part of the Money. But his friend did not take it.
"We are friends, aren't we?" he said. "And friends always help each other. But never take money for that. Never, never!"

There once lived a man with his wife. They were very poor and always hungry.
The man often went to the forest. But he was a bad hunter and sometimes brought home only a small bird.
One day he went to the forest again. But it was a very bad day for him. He did not find even a small bird. He was tired and sad.
He sat down to rest under a tree. Then he heard a sweet song of a bird. He looked up and saw a very small bird whose feathers were red.
The bird said, "I see that you are poor and hungry. I want to help you. I'll give you one of my feathers. Take it home and cook it. You will have a good dinner. Come back tomorrow and I'll give you another feather."
He thanked the bird and went home. He put the feather into a pot and told everything to his wife.
'silly, how can the feather become food? You must catch the bird and kill it. Then we can cook the bird and eat it."
He did not answer. But looked into the pot and saw there a good Dinner.
Every day he went to the forest and every day the small bird gave him a red feather that made a dinner for the man and his wife. But his wife was very greedy.
Every day she said to the man,"We must not have only the little red feather. We must have the bird. Then we can cook two, three or four feathers every day and we shall have as much food as we like."
"But the little bird is my friend. I shall not kill it"
One day the woman followed her husband into the forest, but he did not see her. The woman heard the sweet song of the little red bird. She took a stone and killed it.
The bird fell down off the tree. The man was very sad.
But the wife said, "Now we shall have much food every day."
They went home. At home the woman pulled
the small red feather off the bird and put it into the hot water. She cooked and cooked it. But the feather was just a feather.
And from that day on they were again always hungry.

A long time ago at the village of Serki a woman gave birth to twins - both boys.
They were very nice children. One of the twins, Eiba by name, had a white spot on his right hand.
The other one - they called him Saiba - had two white spots on his left hand.
Father and mother were very happy and very sad at the same time.
You will ask - why? Because, there was a very bad custom in Serki to kill twins. And the chief of Serki said, "Those twins must die, too." But their father and mother did not want to kill the twins.
"What?" said the chief angrily? "You don't want to kill them? Go away from the village and never come back or I shall kill you together with your children."
So the poor family went away from the village.
For many years the family lived in a forest. Life was not easy there. But the children grew up strong.
When they grew up, they helped their father and mother with their work. They were good and handsome young men.
One day they found a man in the forest. He was dying. They tried to help him. But he said, "Don't help me. I shall die soon. I came from Serki. There is a war on there now. We fought bravely. But the enemy is stronger than we are. Go and help my people if you can."
With these words he died.
Eiba and Saiba wanted to go to Serki and help to fight. But their father and mother were against it and said, "The Chief does not want you there. He wanted to kill you when you were small children. That's why we went away from Serki and came to live in the forest."
But the twins wanted to go and help Serki. They said, "This is our country. We must help the people of our country."
So the boys came to Serki and fought against the enemies. They fought bravely. The people of that country won the fight and made the enemy run. So the war was over.
Then a feast at the chief's house began. Saiba and Eiba were at the feast, too. Then one of the men stood up and said, "There are two young men here, two brothers. I think they are very
brave soldiers. But we don't know who they are."
The twins' uncle was at the feast, too. He said to the chief, "Do you remember two little twins - one with a spot on his right hand and the other with two spots on his left hand? Eighteen years ago you told their father and mother to go away from our village as they did not want to kill the twins. These are the same twins."
The chief stood up and asked the twins to forgive him. Then he sent the two young men back to their father and mother with many presents and a letter in which he asked them to come back.
From, that day on they stopped killing twins in Serki.

Once there lived two girls who were friends. They loved each other dearly.
They bought the same dresses. They ate the same food. They went together to bring water from the river.
People always saw them together and said, "What good friends they are!"
But one day a young man said, "You say those two girls are good friends. I am not sure about that. I shall try to find it out."
The next day the young man stopped the two girls in the street.
"Good morning, he said."I want to speak to one of you."
"No. No. You can't do that. We are friends and you must speak to the two of us together."
"I don't want to speak to the two of you. I shall speak to only one of you. Then the one to whom I speak can tell what I say to the other."
And he whispered to one of the girls: "You, you, you, you. Do you hear me?"
The girl answered, "Yes."
The young man went away.
"What did he say to you, my dear?" the second girl asked.
"Oh, he said nothing to me,' said the first girl. "He whispered you, you, you, you."
'What about me, me, me, me?" the second girl asked.
"But it was not about you. It was only you."
"But you said yes to him! You don't want to tell me everything!"
"I tell you that it was only you!"
"Well and what about me?"
"Oh, you silly girl! I tell you he said only You!"
'so you don't want to tell me anything and I am your friend!"
"No. I was your friend. But I am not any more!"
"Well, I don't want to have such a silly friend!"
"You are a liar!"
"I'm not. But you are very, very silly!"
Then one girl went to the right and the other went to the left.
They did not even say good-bye to each other.
That was the
unhappy end of their long friendship.

Two frogs were paying on a rainy day.
Slowly, they hopped and hopped and came into a house.
There was a churn of milk. Both the frogs fell into the churn.
Both the frogs tried for some time, but in vain. One of the frogs lost hope and said, "I can"t swim any more" and he drowned to the bottom. The other did not lose hope.
He kept on swimming. His movements churned the milk into butter. The frog climbed on to a pat of butter and hopped out of the churn.

Two strangers came to a village in the evening.
They came to the chief of that village and said, "May we stay for the night in your village?"
"Oh, yes, strangers," said the chief. "There is a house for strangers in our village. You may sleep there. And there is supper for you to eat. But know this. There is an old custom in our village. Strangers may sleep in our house for strangers. But they must not snore. We kill the man who snores."
The two strangers went to the house. They had a good supper there and then they went to sleep. They slept well. One hour passed. Two hours passed. And one of them began to snore, "Vo, vo, vo."
The other stranger heard the snoring. He thought: "The people will hear the snoring and kill him."
The stranger wanted to save the man. He thought a little and then began to sing. So one stranger snored and the other sang, Vo, Vo, vo, Vo! Vo, Vo, vo, Vo!
We walked on the road. We came to this village. They were good to us hero. Vo, Vo, vo, vo!"
He sang very well. The people did not hear the snoring. They listened to the song.
Then they began to dance. Some of them sang the song together with the stranger and danced to the music.
Men, women and even the chief sang and danced. That entire night one stranger snored. One stranger sang. And all the people sang and danced.
In the morning the strangers came to the chief to say good-bye and to thank him for everything. The chief said good-bye to them and gave them a small bag of money.
"I give this money to both of you. We had a good time with you. We danced and sang well. Thank you very much."
The strangers left the village. But on the road they began to quarrel.
"How shall we divide the money?" said one of them. "I must have the bigger part. Why did you sing that song last night? Because, I snored. So I must have the bigger part of
the money."
And the other man said, "Yes, that's so. But the people could kill you, because you snored. My song saved your life. You must only thank me and give me the bigger part of the money."
They quarrelled and quarrelled and could not decide anything.
Can you?

One day nine dogs went out to hunt.
They met a lion. He said "I am hunting too. I am very, very hungry. Let us hunt together."
So the dogs and the lion hunted together all day. They caught ten antelopes.
Then the lion said" Now we must divide this meat."
One of the dogs said "Why, that's easy. We are ten, and we have ten antelopes. So, each of us will have one antelope."
The lion became very angry. He hit the poor dog and blinded him. The other dogs did not say a word.
But then one of the dogs said, "Our brother was wrong. We must give nine antelopes to King Lion. Then they will be ten together. And we dogs shall take one antelope and we shall also be ten together."
The lion liked his answer and asked the dog "Who taught you to divide like this? You are a wise dog."
The dog answered "Oh, King Lion, you hit our brother and blinded him. That blind brother taught me, King Lion!"

Segab's mother died when he was eleven years old.
His father married another woman, Bizunesh by name.
Segab did not like Bizunesh. But Bizunesh began to love the boy very much and tried to be a good mother to him.
She always made good breakfasts, dinners and suppers. But he did not eat them. She bought him many good clothes. But he did not look at them.
She gave him new shoes. But he went to the river and threw the shoes into the water. When she spoke to him, he always ran away.
One day the poor woman said to Segab, "I always wanted to have a son and now I have you, Segab. I love you very much, my dear boy!"
But Segab said angrily, "I am not your son. And you are not my mother. My mother is dead. I do not love you. I will never love you."
Bizunesh was very sorry and cried all night. In the morning she decided to go to a wise old man. She told him about Segab who did not love her.
The old man said, "I can help you. But first you must bring me three hairs of a lion."
"But how can I do this? The lion will kill me," Bizunesh said.
The old man said, "I cannot answer your question. I need three hairs of a lion. Try to get them."
So Bizunesh went out to try to get the hairs. She went far, far away from her house and came to a place where a lion lived. The lion was very big and roared angrily. He was hungry.
Bizunesh was afraid of him and ran away quickly. But the next day she came back with some meat for the lion. She put the meat not far from him and ran away.
The lion saw the meat and went to it. He ate it all very quickly.
The next day she again brought some meat for the lion and put it a little nearer. And again the lion ate it all up.
Every day Bizunesh brought some meat for the lion and he soon understood that the woman was his friend. He was not angry and he did not roar. He was happy to see her.
And one day Bizunesh came very near to the lion and gave him the meat from her hand. At the same time she tore three hairs off his back.
The lion was not angry. Bizunesh ran to the old man and showed him the hairs.
"What must I do with them now?" she asked.
"Nothing," he answered. "But you know how to go near a lion, little by little, step by step. Do the same with Segab. And I am sure he will love you."

There was once a man who had three sons and all of them loved the same girl.
Each of them asked the girl the same question, "Will you marry me?"
All of them were clever, handsome and strong. The girl liked each of the three young men very much and could not decide which of them was the best.
One day the father of the three brothers said, "Here is some money for you. You will go on a long travel. While you are travelling, you must look for a very, very useful thing. When you find it, you will buy it and bring it home."
The three brothers travelled for a long time and they bought three very useful things.
The first young man bought a magic carpet. On it he could fly to any place in no time.
The second brother bought a magic looking-glass. When he looked into it, he could see anyone and everything that he wanted to see.
The third bought a magic lemon. The juice of the lemon could make a dying man or a woman well again. The three brothers came together and showed their things to one another.
Then one of them said, "We are far from our home and from our dear girl. Let us look into the looking-glass and see her."
The second brother took out his looking-glass, and they all looked into it. They saw that the girl was very ill. Then the first brother asked the other brothers to sit down on his carpet.
All of them were at the girl's house in no time. The third brother cut his lemon and gave the juice to the girl. The girl drank it and she was well again.
The young men were very happy.
"Now which of us will you marry? Which is better?" they asked the girl.
"I thank you all, my dear friends," answered the girl. "One of the brothers saw me in his looking-glass and that helped to save my life.
His looking-glass is a very useful thing and he will have it forever. Another brother brought all three of you here on his carpet and that helped to save me, too.
It is also a very useful thing and he will have it forever. And one of you gave me the lemon juice and now I am well again. But he has no lemon now.
He gave all he had to save me. I will be his wife."
And the other two brothers said, "Yes, the girl is right."

Once upon a time there was a chief who had a beautiful daughter.
Many young men wanted to marry her. But the chief thought, "They are not very good for my daughter." Fire and Rain wanted to marry her, too. Rain came to the chief's daughter and said, "Will you marry me, oh daughter of the chief?"
"Yes, I will," said the girl.
At the same time Fire came to the chief and said, "I want to marry your daughter. Will you give her to me for my wife?"
The chief said, "Yes, I will."
Then the chief sent for his daughter and said to her, "My dear daughter, you will marry Fire. I gave him my promise."
"Oh, Father," Said the girl, "I cannot marry Fire, I must marry Rain. I gave my promise to him."
"What shall we do?" cried the chief. "You can't marry both Fire and Rain."
Then Fire and Rain came to the chief and his daughter. The chief said to them.
"Tomorrow will be the day of my daughter's marriage."
"To me?" asked Fire.
"To me?" asked Rain.
"To the winner of a race. To him I will give my daughter."
On the day of the race many people came to the town. They all wanted to see the race. Some of them said, "Fire will win."
Others said, "Rain will win."
But the chief's daughter thought: "I want to marry Rain."
The day of the race came. When it was time to begin, the drummers beat the drums. The race began. The wind helped Fire to run very quickly. But where was Rain? Nobody saw him. The people cried.
"Look, Fire is quite near the finish!'" But then Rain began to fall from the sky and put out Fire. So fire could not finish the race.
The people cried, "Rain, Rain is the first!"
So the chief gave his daughter to Rain and they were very happy.
And from that day on fire and Rain are enemies.

Many, many years ago the Sun and the Moon lived together on the earth.
Water was their best friend and they often came to see him. But water never went to see the Sun and the Moon in their house.
"Why don't you come to see us?" the Sun once asked him.
"I have too many friends," Water answered, "they will come with me. I'm afraid there will be no place for them in your house. "
"But I shall build a new big house," the Sun said.
And the Sun built a very big house and then asked Water to come to him. Water came with all the fish and water animals.
"May I come in with all my people?" Water asked.
"Yes, come in," the Sun said. : Very soon Water in the house was knee-deep for the Sun. Then in a minute Water was up to the Sun's head and came higher and higher with all the fish and water animals.
At last Water was so high in the house that the Sun and the Moon went on to the roof and sat there.
But soon Water came up on to the roof. What could the Sun and the Moon do? Where could they sit?
And they went up to the sky. They liked the place and began to live there.

Spider was very lazy.
Every morning he got up at 12 0' clock, ate his breakfast and said to his wife, "I am going to our farm." But he did not go to the farm. He had no farm at all.
He went to the forest and sat there under a big tree all day long.
His wife sometimes said to him, "Tell me when you want my help on the farm."
She said nothing more. She did not want to make him angry.
Spider answered then,"Oh, there is plenty of time yet. Don't be afraid. I shall tell you, when I need you."
The people often asked him, "When will you begin to work on your farm?"
And he answered, "There is plenty of time yet."
Then one day he said to his wife, "Tomorrow I want to plant some nuts on our farm. Go to the market and buy a bag of nuts. I must have them for tomorrow. "
His wife was happy to hear that and ran to the market to buy the nuts.
The next day Spider went with the nuts to the forest, ate as many nuts as he wanted and then had a good sleep under a big tree.
In the evening he came home and said to his wife. "Oh, how tired and hungry I am! I was working on our farm all day long. Is supper ready? Life is hard for us men. We work from morning till night and you, women, you have only to cook dinners and suppers."
Every day spider went away. But he did not work on the farm. He only ate nuts and then rested in the forest.
Time passed. And people began to bring home their nuts. But spider brought nothing.
Then his wife said, "When will you bring our nuts home? Shall I help you?"
"No, no, I don't want your help," spider answered. "I shall bring the nuts home in a few days."
But how could he bring the nuts home? He had no nuts now! He had not even a farm! "Where can I get the nuts?" he asked himself. "Ah, I know. I shall steal some," he thought.
At night he went out of his house and soon came to the chief's farm. It was a big farm. And there were many nuts in the nut trees. So he filled his bag with nuts, hid the bag under a tree in the forest and went back home.
The next morning he said to his wife, "To day I shall bring the nuts from our farm. Please make a good supper! I shall be very hungry and tired."
"Yes, my dear," said his wife.
Spider went to the forest. The bag of nuts was here under the tree. Spider ate some nuts and had a good sleep.
In the evening he carried the bag to his wife. She was so happy! She opened the bag, took one nut, ate it, then took another and then another. How good they were!
The next night Spider again went to the chief's farm and again stole a bag of nuts.
When the next evening came, he carried it to his wife. He did the same thing
again and again.
But one night the chief's servant saw that a thief was stealing the nuts. "I must catch the thief. But how can I do that?" thought the servant.
Then an idea came to him. He took two big pots and went to the forest to find some gutta-percha trees. He made brown rubber out of the gutta-percha sap and then he made a rubber man.
He placed the sticky rubber man near the nut trees. "Now I shall know who the thief is," he said to himself.
When night came and all the people were asleep, Spider went to the chief's farm. He came to the place where the nuts were and suddenly saw a man there. "Oh," he asked the man, "what do you want here?
There was no answer.
"Who are you?" Spider asked him again. "What are you doing here at night?"
The rubber man did not speak. Then Spider hit the rubber man on the head and cried, "Why don't you answer me?"
The rubber man was so sticky that Spider could not pull his hand away from the man's head.
"Let me go! Let me go!" cried and hit the rubber man with the other hand. And the other hand stuck to the man's head too.
Now Spider understood that it was not a man. Still he tried to push it away with his foot. But his foot stuck to the rubber man, too. Now Spider could not move any more.
"How silly I was," he said to himself. "People will come in the morning and everybody will know that I am a thief."
Poor Spider! In the morning the chief's servant tore him away from the rubber man and brought him before the chief.
And from that day on Spider hid in a dark place and did not speak to anybody because he was so ashamed. And now his children and his children's children and his children's children's children always hide in dark places.

Long, long ago the Chameleon and the Dog were friends. But sometimes the Dog walked with the Man.
One day the Chameleon asked the Dog, "Why do you sometimes go with the Man?"
"The Man and I are friends," answered the Dog. "The Man is a hunter and we go hunting together. I help him to hunt. We have meat when we come back. Then we eat it."
Once, the Man and the Dog went hunting. They killed an antelope and carried it to the hunter's house. The Chameleon saw them and followed them.
The hunter made dinner from the meat and began to eat it. The Dog came up to Man and wanted to have some meat too. Then the Hunter took a big stick and hit the Dog on the head!
The poor Dog cried and ran away. The Chameleon saw everything and he ran away too. He ran into the forest, stopped there and began to shake his head.
"Yangu, yangu, yangu," he cried. "That's too bad! Why, the Dog says he is the hunter's friend. He helps him to hunt and brings much meat. And the hunter hits the poor Dog on the head with a stick! The Man is not good. I will not live near the Man. I will live in the forest!"
That's why the Chameleon lives in the forest far from the home of the Man.
When he thinks of the Man and his big stick, he shakes his head and says, "Yangu, yangu, yangu! too bad, too bad, too bad!"

A hen came to the river every day. She drank water there.
One day the crocodile saw her and came up to her. He wanted to eat her up.
But she cried, "Oh, don't eat me, my dear brother!" The crocodile let her go. He could not eat his sister!
The next day, when the hen came to the river again, the crocodile decided to eat her up.
But again the hen cried, "Oh, don't eat me, my dear brother!" And again the crocodile did not eat her.
But he thought: "How can I be her brother? I live in the water and she doesn't."
Then the crocodile went to his friend, a lizard. "Oh, my friend! A big hen comes to the river every day and when I want to catch her, she says that I am her brother. How can that be?"
"Oh, my silly friend!" the lizard answered. "Don't you know that the hen, the turtle, the lizard lay eggs as crocodiles do, my dear? So we all are brothers and sisters. Do you understand?"
"Oh, thank you very much," said the crocodile.
Now you know why crocodiles never eat hens!

Once, the Sun said to the Hawk, "I need some money. Please give me some. I shall give it back to you very soon." The Hawk gave some money to the Sun.
A week passed. A month passed. But the Sun did not give back the money.
At last the Hawk decided to go to the Sun and ask for his money. He went to the Sun when he was high up in the sky.
"Do you remember that you must give me back my money?" He said to the Sun.
The Sun answered, "Yes, I do. But I am in the sky now and the money is at home. Please come when I am at home and I shall give the money back."
"All right," said the Hawk.
He decided to go next morning. But the next morning he was too late.
The Sun was already in the sky. The Hawk went to the Sun's house another time and again the Sun was not at home. He went many times. But he never found the Sun at home.
One day on his way to the Sun, the Hawk met his friend, the Cock. "Why do you go to the Sun every day?" the Cock asked.
"I gave him some money a long time ago and I cannot get it back! The Sun says that when he is in the sky, he cannot go home to get the money. And I can never find him at home."
"I can help you," the Cock said. "You stay the night with me. I always get up earlier than the Sun does. I shall wake you up very early. Then you can run quickly to the Sun and get your money."
So the Hawk stayed the night with the Cock. In the morning the cock woke him. "Cock-a-doodle-doo! Cock-a-doodle-doo! Get up, Hawk! Run to the Sun! He is at home now. He is not in the sky yet!"
The Hawk got up, thanked the Cock and went to the Sun.
The Sun was at home. He was sleeping.
"Good morning, Sun!" the Hawk said. "It is time for you to get up. And I am here to get my money!"
"Good morning," the Sun said. "Who told you to come to me
so early?"
The Hawk did not answer. "If you want to get your money, you must tell me, who told you to come to me so early."
And then the Hawk said, "It was the Cock."
The Sun was very angry. He said "Now the Cock will pay for it with his children! Now all the Cock's children will be yours!"
And from that day the Hawk began to carry off chickens.

Long, long ago the Jackal and the Dog were friends and lived in the bush.
They hunted together every day. In the evening they came home and ate their food together.
One day they did not catch anything and came back very hungry. A cold wind was blowing in the bush.
"Oh," said the Dog, "it is so bad to be hungry and cold!"
"Go to sleep," the Jackal said. "When morning comes, we shall go hunting again and we shall catch a young antelope."
But the Dog could not sleep. Then he saw a red light far away.
"Jackal," he cried, "what is that red light over there?"
"There's a village and that red light is a man's fire," the Jackal answered.
"Fire is warm and it is cold here," said the Dog. "I say, Jackal, will you go and bring some fire? You are so brave!"
"No, no, I won't. You can bring, if you like."
The Dog did not want to go, because he was afraid of men.
But he thought, "I am sure there are some bones near the fire. I can eat them. And the fire is so warm!" He was so hungry and cold! Hunger and cold made him forget his fear and he said to the Jackal, "I am going to the village to get some fire and some bones. If I don't come back soon, please cry Bo-aa, bo-aa! Then I shall know where you are and where I must go."
So the Dog ran to the village. He saw a hut near the fire. There were some bones near the hut. They were so good for the hungry Dog! He came nearer to the bones. But then a man came out of the hut and saw the Dog.
The Dog was afraid of him and cried, "Oh, please, don't kill me! I am a poor Dog and I want to warm myself by the fire. Then I shall go back to the bush."
"Very well," the man said. "You may sit by the fire. But when you are warm, you must go back to the bush."
The Dog thanked him and sat by the fire. He was quite happy. He was warm and there was a big bone under his nose.
He began to eat it. And then the man came out of the hut and asked "Aren't you warm yet?"
"Not yet," the Dog answered; he saw another bone not far away and wanted to eat it, too. Soon
the man asked again, "Aren't you warm yet?"
"Please let me stay a little longer. I am not quite warm yet," was the Dog's answer.
Then the man came up to the Dog. The Dog looked into his eyes and said, "Yes, I am warm now, but I don't want to go back to the bush. I am often cold and hungry there. Let me live with you in the village, please! I shall help you to hunt birds and animals in the bush and forest. And you'll give me some bones to eat."
"All right," the man said. "You may stay with me."
From that day on the Dog began to live with the man. And when you hear the Jackal cry at night Bo-aa, bo-aa, you know that he is asking the Dog to come back.
But the Dog never answers and now the Jackal lives in the bush alone.

Long, long ago the animals had no tails or very small ones.
One day the Lion asked all the animals to come to him to get good tails. It was cold that day and it was raining.
The hare had only a short little tail. But he did not like to go out and said to the other animals, "Please, bring me a tail. I can't go anywhere when it rains."
"What tail do you want to have?" the animals asked him.
"Oh, any tail will be good for me. But it must not be too long or too short."
Some time later the animals came back and each animal had a beautiful tail. But nobody brought a tail for the hare.
I think that some of them forgot about the hare. Some had no time. Some could not find a good tail for the hare.
But I know this. If you must do something, don't ask others to do it for you. Don't forget about the hare with his short little tail!

Once, a Kite's child was very ill.
The Kite's sister came to Mother Kite and said, "I know a good doctor for your child. The Spider is the best doctor here. I shall ask him to come to you".
Mother Kite asked her sister to go for the doctor.
Her sister went to the spider and said, "The Kite has a child and it is very ill. Will you go to the Kite and see her child?"
"All right," the Spider said, "but I am afraid to go. There lives a Hen near the Kite's house and she will eat me up".
"Oh, no," said the Kite's sister, "I am sure, she won't eat you up."
So the Spider took his medicine bottles, put them in a bag and went to the Kite. But he was afraid of the Hen.
So he wrote a letter and put it into the bag with medicine bottles.
Very soon he saw the Hen! He hid himself behind a tree. But the Hen saw the Spider, picked him up and gave him to her chickens to eat.
Now the Kite waited and waited for the Spider. Then she went out to meet him and saw a bag with medicine bottles and a letter there.
She read: "To the Kite. I was on my way to your home, when I met the Hen who ate me up."
The Kite flew back to her little son. The poor child soon died.
The Kite decided to take revenge and began to eat chickens. And now the Kite always catches chickens and eats them.
And when you catch a hen, it cries out, "It was "not I! It was not I!" She wants to say: "I did not eat the Spider! Not I! Not I! "

Once there was a man who was strong.
When he gathered firewood, he hauled twice as much as anyone else in the village. When he hunted, he carried home two antelopes at once.
This man's name was Shadusa, and his wife was named Shettu. One day he said to her, "Just look at these muscles. I must be the strongest man in the world. From now on, just call me Master Man."
But Shettu said, "Quit your foolish boasting. No matter how strong you are, there will always be someone stronger. And watch out, or someday you may meet him."
The next day, Shettu paid a visit to a neighboring village. On the walk home she grew thirsty, so she stopped by a well. She threw in the bucket—splash—then she pulled on the rope. But though she tugged and she heaved, she could not lift the bucket.
Just then a woman walked up with a baby strapped to her back. Balanced on her head was a calabash, a hollow gourd for carrying water.
"You"ll get no water here today," said Shettu. "The bucket won"t come up."
The two women pulled together, but still the bucket would not budge.
"Wait a moment," said the woman. She untied her baby and set him on the ground. "Pull up the bucket for Mama."
The baby quickly pulled up the bucket and filled his mother's calabash. Then he threw in the bucket and pulled it up once more for Shettu.
Shettu gasped. "I don"t believe it!"
"Oh, it's not so strange," said the woman. "After all, my husband is Master Man."
When Shettu got home, she told Shadusa what had happened.
"Master Man?" yelled Shadusa. "He can"t call himself that! I"m Master Man. I"ll have to teach that fellow a lesson."
"Oh, husband, don"t!" pleaded Shettu. "If the baby is so strong, think what the father must be like. You"ll get yourself killed."
But Shadusa said, "We"ll see about that!"
The next morning, Shadusa set out early and walked till he came to the well. He threw in the bucket—splash—then he pulled on the rope. But though he tugged and he heaved, he could not lift the bucket.
Just then the woman with the baby walked up.
"Wait a minute," said Shadusa. "What do you think you"re doing?"
"I"m getting water, of course," answered the woman.
"Well, you can"t," said Shadusa. "The bucket won"t come up."
The woman set down the baby, who quickly pulled up the bucket and filled his mother's calabash.
"Wah!" yelled Shadusa. "How did he do that?"
"It's easy," said the woman, "when your father is Master Man."
Shadusa gulped and thought about going home. But instead he thrust out his chest and said, "I want to meet this fellow, so I can show him who's the real Master Man."
"Oh, I wouldn"t do that," said the woman. "He devours men like you! But suit yourself."
So Shadusa followed the woman back to her compound. Inside the fenced yard was a gigantic fireplace, and beside it was a pile of huge bones.
"What's all this?" asked Shadusa.
"Well, you see," said the woman, "our hut is so small that my husband must come out here to eat his elephants."
Just then they heard a great ROAR, so loud that Shadusa had to cover his ears. Then the ground began to shake, until Shadusa could hardly stand.
"What's that?" he shouted.
"That's Master Man."
"Oh, no!" wailed Shadusa. "You weren"t fooling. I"ve got to get out of here!"
"It's too late now," said the woman. "But let me hide you."
By the fence were some large clay pots, each as tall as a man, for storing grain. She helped him climb into one, then set the lid in place.
Shadusa raised the lid a crack to peek out. And there he was, coming into the compound with a dead elephant across his shoulders. It was Master Man!
"Did you have a good day, dear?" asked the woman.
"Yes!" bellowed Master Man. "But I forgot my bow and arrows. I had to kill this elephant with my bare hands."
As Shadusa watched in terror, Master Man built a huge fire in the fireplace, roasted the elephant, and devoured every bit of it but the bones.
Suddenly he stopped and sniffed. "Wife! I smell a man!"
"Oh, there's no man here now," said the woman. "One passed by while you were gone. That must be what you smell."
"Too bad," thundered Master Man. "He would have been tasty." Then he rolled over on the ground, and before long the leaves were trembling from his snores.
The woman hurried over to the pot and slid off the lid. "Quick!" she whispered. "Get away while you can."
Shadusa leaped out and bolted down the path. But he hadn"t gone too far when he heard a distant ROAR and felt the ground tremble beneath him. Master Man was coming!
Shadusa ran till he came upon five farmers hoeing a field.
"What's your hurry?" called one.
"Master Man is after me!"
"Take it easy," said the farmer. "We won"t let anyone hurt you."
Just then they heard a terrible ROAR. The farmers all dropped their hoes and covered their ears.
"What was that?" asked the farmer.
"That was Master Man!"
"Well, then," said the farmer, "you"d better keep running!" And the five farmers fled across the field.
Shadusa ran on till he met ten porters carrying bundles.
"What's your hurry?" called one.
"Master Man is after me!"
"Relax," said the porter. "No one can fight us all."
Just then the ground quaked, and they all bounced into the air. The porters fell in a heap, all mixed up with their bundles.
"What was that?" asked the porter.
"That was Master Man!"
"Then run for your life!" And the ten porters bolted from the path.
Shadusa ran on till he rounded a bend—then he stopped short. There beside the path sat a stranger, and there beside the stranger lay a huge pile of elephant bones.
"What's your hurry?" growled the stranger.
"Master Man is after me," moaned Shadusa.
"You better not say so—"cause I"m Master Man!"
From behind Shadusa came another ROAR, and once again he bounced into the air. The stranger caught him in one hand as Master Man ran up.
"Let me have him!" bellowed Master Man.
"Come and get him!" growled the stranger.
Master Man lunged, but the stranger tossed Shadusa into a tree. Then the two strong men wrapped themselves around each other and wrestled across the ground.
The noise of the battle nearly deafened Shadusa. The dust choked him. The trembling of the tree nearly shook him down.
As Shadusa watched, the two men struggled to their feet, still clutching each another. Then each gave a mighty leap, and together they rose into the air. Higher and higher they went, till they passed through a cloud and out of sight.
Shadusa waited and waited, but the men never came back down. At last he climbed carefully from the tree, then ran and ran and never stopped till he got home safe and sound. And he never called himself Master Man again.
As for those other two, they"re still in the clouds, where they battle on to this day. Of course, they rest whenever they"re both worn out. But sooner or later they start up again, and what a noise they make!
Some people call that noise thunder. But now you know what it really is—two fools fighting forever to see which one is Master Man.

Effiong Edem was a native of Cobham Town. He had a very fine daughter, whose name was Afiong. All the young men in the country wanted to marry her on account of her beauty; but she refused all offers of marriage in spite of repeated entreaties from her parents, as she was very vain, and said she would only marry the best-looking man in the country, who would have to be young and strong, and capable of loving her properly.
Most of the men her parents wanted her to marry, although they were rich, were old men and ugly, so the girl continued to disobey her parents, at which they were very much grieved.
The Skull who lived in the spirit land heard of the beauty of this Calabar virgin, and thought he would like to possess her; so he went about amongst his friends and borrowed different parts of the body from them, all of the best. From one he got a good head, another lent him a body, a third gave him strong arms, and a fourth lent him a fine pair of legs. At last he was complete, and was a very perfect specimen of manhood.
He then left the spirit land and went to Cobham market, where he saw Afiong, and admired her very much.
About this time Afiong heard that a very fine man had been seen in the market, who was better-looking than any of the natives. She therefore went to the market at once, and directly she saw the Skull in his borrowed beauty, she fell in love with him, and invited him to her house. The Skull was delighted, and went home with her, and on his arrival was introduced by the girl to her parents, and immediately asked their consent to marry their daughter. At first they refused, as they did not wish her to marry a stranger, but at last they agreed.
He lived with Afiong for two days in her parents' house, and then said he wished to take his wife back to his country, which was far off. To this the girl readily agreed, as he was such a fine man, but her parents tried to persuade her not to go. However, being very headstrong, she made up her mind to go, and they started off together.
After they had been gone a few days the father consulted his Ju Ju man, who by casting lots very soon discovered that his daughter's husband belonged to the spirit land, and that she would surely be killed. They therefore all mourned her as dead.
After walking for several days, Afiong and the Skull crossed the border between the spirit land and the human country. Directly they set foot in the spirit land, first of all one man came to the Skull and demanded his legs, then another his head, and the next his body, and so on, until in a few minutes the Skull was left by itself in all its natural ugliness. At this the girl was very frightened, and wanted to return home, but the Skull would not allow this, and ordered her to go with him.
When they arrived at the Skull's house they found his mother, who was a very old woman quite incapable of doing any work, who could only creep about. Afiong tried her best to help her, and cooked her food, and brought water and firewood for the old woman. The old creature was very grateful for these attentions, and soon became quite fond of Afiong.
One day the old woman told Afiong that she was very sorry for her, but all the people in the spirit land were cannibals, and when they heard there was a human being in their country, they would come down and kill her and eat her. The Skull's mother then hid Afiong, and as she had looked after her so well, she promised she would send her back to her country as soon as possible, providing that she promised for the future to obey her parents. This Afiong readily consented to do.
Then the old woman sent for the spider, who was a very clever hairdresser, and made him dress Afiong's hair in the latest fashion. She also presented her with anklets and other things on account of her kindness. She then made a Ju Ju and called the winds to come and convey Afiong to her home. At first a violent tornado came, with thunder, lightning and rain, but the Skull's mother sent him away as unsuitable. The next wind to come was a gentle breeze, so she told the breeze to carry Afiong to her mother's house, and said good-bye to her. Very soon afterwards the breeze deposited Afiong outside her home, and left her there.
When the parents saw their daughter they were very glad, as they had for some months given her up as lost. The father spread soft animals' skins on the ground from where his daughter was standing all the way to the house, so that her feet should not be soiled. Afiong then walked to the house, and her father called all the young girls who belonged to Afiong's company to come and dance, and the feasting and dancing was kept up for eight days and nights.
When the rejoicing was over, the father reported what had happened to the head chief of the town. The chief then passed a law that parents should never allow their daughters to marry strangers who came from a far country. Then the father told his daughter to marry a friend of his, and she willingly consented, and lived with him for many years, and had many children.

Tortoise had formerly lived in the same town with several other animals. But, after awhile, they had decided to separate, and each built his own village.
One day, Tortoise decided to roam. So he started, and went on an excursion; leaving his wife and two children in the village. On his way, he came to the village of Antelope. The latter welcomed him, killed a fowl, and prepared food for him; and they sat at the table, eating.
When they had finished eating, Antelope asked, "Kudu! My friend, what is your journey for?"
Tortoise answered, "I have come to inquire of you, as to you and me, which is the elder?"
Antelope replied, "Kudu! I am older than you!"
But Tortoise responded, "No! I am the elder!"
Then Antelope said, 'show me the reason why you are older than I!"
Tortoise said, continuing the discussion, "I will show you a sign of seniority. Let us have a race, as a test of speed."
Antelope replied derisively, "Aiye! how shall I know to test speed with Kudu? Does Kudu race?" However, he agreed, and said, "Well! in three days the race shall be made."
Tortoise spoke audaciously, "You, Mbalanga, cannot surpass me in a race!" Antelope laughed, having accepted the challenge; while Tortoise pretended to sneer, and said, "I am the one who will overcome!"
The course chosen, beginning on the beach south of Batanga, was more than seventy miles from the Campo River northward to the Balimba Country.
Then Tortoise went away, going everywhere to give directions, and returned to his village. He sent word secretly to all the Tortoise Tribe to call them. When they had come very many of them together, he told them, "I have called my friend Mbalanga for a race. I know that he can surpass me in this race, unless you all help me in my plan. He will follow the sea-beach. You all must line yourselves among the bushes at the top of the beach along the entire route all the way from Campo to Balimba. When Mbalanga, coming along, at any point, looks around to see whether I am following, and calls out, 'Kudu! where are you?' the one of you who is nearest that spot must step out from his place, and answer for me, 'Here!'"
Thus he located all the other tortoises in the bushes on the entire route. Also, he placed a colored mark on all the tortoises, making the face of every one alike. He stationed them clear on to the place where he expected that Antelope would be exhausted. Then he ended, taking his own place there.
Antelope also arranged for himself, and said, to his wife, "My wife! make me food; for, Kudu and I have agreed on a race; and it begins at seven o'clock in the morning."
When all was ready, Antelope said, to (the one whom he supposed was) Kudu, "Come! let us race!"
They started. Antelope ran on and on, and came as far as about ten miles to the town of Ubenji, among the Igara people. At various spots on the way Tortoise apparently was lost behind; but as constantly he seemed to reappear, saying, "I'm here!"
At once, Antelope raced forward rapidly, pu! pu! pu! to a town named Ipenyenye. Then he looked around and said, "Where is Kudu?"
A tortoise stepped out of the bushes, saying "Here I am! You haven't raced."
Antelope raced on until he reached the town of Beya. Again looking around, he said, "Where is Kudu?"
A tortoise stepped out, replying, "I'm here!" Antelope again raced, until he reached the town Lolabe. Again he asked, "Where is Kudu?"
A tortoise saying to himself, "He hasn't heard anything," replied, "Here I am!" Again Antelope raced on as far as from there to a rocky point by the sea named Ilale-ja-moto; and then he called, "Wherever is Kudu?"
A tortoise ready answered, "Here I am!"
From thence, he came on in the race another stretch of about tea miles, clear to the town of Bongaheli of the Batanga people. At each place on the route, when Antelope, losing sight of Tortoise, called, "Kudu! where are you?" promptly the tortoise on guard at that spot replied, "I'm here!"
Then on he went, steadily going, going, another stretch of about twenty miles to Plantation Beach. Still the prompt reply to Antelope's call, "Kudu, where are you?" was, "I'm here!"
As he started away from Plantation, the wearied Antelope began to feel his legs tired. However, he pressed on to Small Batanga, hoping for victory over his despised contestant. But, on his reaching the edge of Balimba, the tortoise was there ready with his, "I'm here!"
Finally, on reaching the end of the Balimba settlement, Antelope fell down, dying, froth coming from his mouth, and lay dead, being utterly exhausted with running. But, when Tortoise arrived, he took a magic medicine, and restored Antelope to life; and then exulted over him by beating him, and saying, "Don't you show me your audacity another day by daring to run with me! I have surpassed you!"
So, they returned separately to their homes on the Campo River. Tortoise called together the Tortoise Tribe; and Antelope called all the Antelope Tribe. And they met in a Council of all the Animals. Then Tortoise rose and spoke, "All you Kudu Tribe! Mbalanga said I would not surpass him in a race. But, this day I have surpassed!"
So the Antelope Tribe had to acknowledge, "Yes, you, Kudu, have surpassed our champion. It's a great shame to us; for, we had not supposed that a slow fellow such as we thought you to be, could possibly do it, or be able to outrun a Mbalanga."
So the Council decided that, of all the tribes of animals, Tortoise was to be held as greatest; for, that it had outrun Antelope. And the Animals gave Tortoise the power to rule.

Once upon a time all the streams and rivers ran so dry that the animals did not know how to get water. After a very long search, which had been quite in vain, they found a tiny spring, which only wanted to be dug deeper so as to yield plenty of water. So the beasts said to each other, "Let us dig a well, and then we shall not fear to die of thirst;" and they all consented except the jackal, who hated work of any kind, and generally got somebody to do it for him.
When they had finished their well, they held a council as to who should be made the guardian of the well, so that the jackal might not come near it, for, they said, "he would not work, therefore he shall not drink."
After some talk it was decided that the rabbit should be left in charge; then all the other beasts went back to their homes.
When they were out of sight the jackal arrived. "Good morning! Good morning, rabbit!" and the rabbit politely said, "Good morning!" Then the jackal unfastened the little bag that hung at his side, and pulled out of it a piece of honeycomb which he began to eat, and turning to the rabbit he remarked:
"As you see, rabbit, I am not thirsty in the least, and this is nicer than any water."
"Give me a bit," asked the rabbit. So the jackal handed him a very little morsel.
"Oh, how good it is!" cried the rabbit; "give me a little more, dear friend!"
But the jackal answered, "If you really want me to give you some more, you must have your paws tied behind you, and lie on your back, so that I can pour it into your mouth."
The rabbit did as he was bid, and when he was tied tight and popped on his back, the jackal ran to the spring and drank as much as he wanted. When he had quite finished he returned to his den.
In the evening the animals all came back, and when they saw the rabbit lying with his paws tied, they said to him: "Rabbit, how did you let yourself be taken in like this?"
"It was all the fault of the jackal," replied the rabbit; "he tied me up like this, and told me he would give me something nice to eat. It was all a trick just to get at our water."
"Rabbit, you are no better than an idiot to have let the jackal drink our water when he would not help to find it. Who shall be our next watchman? We must have somebody a little sharper than you!" and the little hare called out, "I will be the watchman."
The following morning the animals all went their various ways, leaving the little hare to guard the spring. When they were out of sight the jackal came back. "Good morning! good morning, little hare," and the little hare politely said, "Good morning."
"Can you give me a pinch of snuff?" said the jackal.
"I am so sorry, but I have none," answered the little hare.
The jackal then came and sat down by the little hare, and unfastened his little bag, pulling out of it a piece of honeycomb. He licked his lips and exclaimed, "Oh, little hare, if you only knew how good it is!"
"What is it?" asked the little hare.
"It is something that moistens my throat so deliciously," answered the jackal, "that after I have eaten it I don"t feel thirsty any more, while I am sure that all you other beasts are for ever wanting water."
"Give me a bit, dear friend," asked the little hare.
"Not so fast," replied the jackal. "If you really wish to enjoy what you are eating, you must have your paws tied behind you, and lie on your back, so that I can pour it into your mouth."
"You can tie them, only be quick," said the little hare, and when he was tied tight and popped on his back, the jackal went quietly down to the well, and drank as much as he wanted. When he had quite finished he returned to his den.
In the evening the animals all came back; and when they saw the little hare with his paws tied, they said to him: "Little hare, how did you let yourself be taken in like this? Didn"t you boast you were very sharp? You undertook to guard our water; now show us how much is left for us to drink!"
"It is all the fault of the jackal," replied the little hare. "He told me he would give me something nice to eat if I would just let him tie my hands behind my back."
Then the animals said, "Who can we trust to mount guard now?" And the panther answered, "Let it be the tortoise."
The following morning the animals all went their various ways, leaving the tortoise to guard the spring. When they were out of sight the jackal came back. "Good morning, tortoise; good morning."
But the tortoise took no notice.
"Good morning, tortoise; good morning." But still the tortoise pretended not to hear.
Then the jackal said to himself, "Well, to-day I have only got to manage a bigger idiot than before. I shall just kick him on one side, and then go and have a drink." So he went up to the tortoise and said to him in a soft voice, "Tortoise! tortoise!" but the tortoise took no notice. Then the jackal kicked him out of the way, and went to the well and began to drink, but scarcely had he touched the water, than the tortoise seized him by the leg. The jackal shrieked out: "Oh, you will break my leg!" but the tortoise only held on the tighter. The jackal then took his bag and tried to make the tortoise smell the honeycomb he had inside; but the tortoise turned away his head and smelt nothing. At last the jackal said to the tortoise, "I should like to give you my bag and everything in it," but the only answer the tortoise made was to grasp the jackal's leg tighter still.
So matters stood when the other animals came back. The moment he saw them, the jackal gave a violent tug, and managed to free his leg, and then took to his heels as fast as he could. And the animals all said to the tortoise:
"Well done, tortoise, you have proved your courage; now we can drink from our well in peace, as you have got the better of that thieving jackal!"

There was once a dove who built a nice soft nest as a home for her three little ones. She was very proud of their beauty, and perhaps talked about them to her neighbours more than she need have done, till at last everybody for miles round knew where the three prettiest baby doves in the whole country-side were to be found.
One day a jackal who was prowling about in search of a dinner came by chance to the foot of the rock where the dove's nest was hidden away, and he suddenly bethought himself that if he could get nothing better he might manage to make a mouthful of one of the young doves. So he shouted as loud as he could, "Ohe, ohe, mother dove."
And the dove replied, trembling with fear, "What do you want, sir?"
"One of your children," said he; "and if you don"t throw it to me I will eat up you and the others as well."
Now, the dove was nearly driven distracted at the jackal's words; but, in order to save the lives of the other two, she did at last throw the little one out of the nest. The jackal ate it up, and went home to sleep.
Meanwhile the mother dove sat on the edge of her nest, crying bitterly, when a heron, who was flying slowly past the rock, was filled with pity for her, and stopped to ask, "What is the matter, you poor dove?"
And the dove answered, "A jackal came by, and asked me to give him one of my little ones, and said that if I refused he would jump on my nest and eat us all up."
But the heron replied, "You should not have believed him. He could never have jumped so high. He only deceived you because he wanted something for supper." And with these words the heron flew off.
He had hardly got out of sight when again the jackal came creeping slowly round the foot of the rock. And when he saw the dove he cried out a second time, "Ohe, ohe, mother dove! give me one of your little ones, or I will jump on your nest and eat you all up."
This time the dove knew better, and she answered boldly, "Indeed, I shall do nothing of the sort," though her heart beat wildly with fear when she saw the jackal preparing for a spring.
However, he only cut himself against the rock, and thought he had better stick to threats, so he started again with his old cry, "Mother dove, mother dove! be quick and give me one of your little ones, or I will eat you all up."
But the mother dove only answered as before, "Indeed, I shall do nothing of the sort, for I know we are safely out of your reach."
The jackal felt it was quite hopeless to get what he wanted, and asked, "Tell me, mother dove, how have you suddenly become so wise?"
"It was the heron who told me," replied she.
"And which way did he go?" said the jackal.
"Down there among the reeds. You can see him if you look," said the dove.
Then the jackal nodded good-bye, and went quickly after the heron. He soon came up to the great bird, who was standing on a stone on the edge of the river watching for a nice fat fish. "Tell me, heron," said he, "when the wind blows from that quarter, to which side do you turn?"
"And which side do you turn to?" asked the heron.
The jackal answered, "I always turn to this side."
"Then that is the side I turn to," remarked the heron.
"And when the rain comes from that quarter, which side do you turn to?"
And the heron replied, "And which side do you turn to?"
"Oh, I always turn to this side," said the jackal.
"Then that is the side I turn to," said the heron.
"And when the rain comes straight down, what do you do?"
"What do you do yourself?" asked the heron.
"I do this," answered the jackal. "I cover my head with my paws."
"Then that is what I do," said the heron. "I cover my head with my wings," and as he spoke he lifted his large wings and spread them completely over his head.
With one bound the jackal had seized him by the neck, and began to shake him.
"Oh, have pity, have pity!" cried the heron. "I never did you any harm."
"You told the dove how to get the better of me, and I am going to eat you for it."
"But if you will let me go," entreated the heron, "I will show you the place where the panther has her lair."
"Then you had better be quick about it," said the jackal, holding tight on to the heron until he had pointed out the panther's den. "Now you may go, my friend, for there is plenty of food here for me."
So the jackal came up to the panther, and asked politely, "Panther, would you like me to look after your children while you are out hunting?"
"I should be very much obliged," said the panther; "but be sure you take care of them. They always cry all the time that I am away."
So saying she trotted off, and the jackal marched into the cave, where he found ten little panthers, and instantly ate one up. By-and-bye the panther returned from hunting, and said to him, "Jackal, bring out my little ones for their supper."
The jackal fetched them out one by one till he had brought out nine, and he took the last one and brought it out again, so the whole ten seemed to be there, and the panther was quite satisfied.
Next day she went again to the chase, and the jackal ate up another little panther, so now there were only eight. In the evening, when she came back, the panther said, "Jackal, bring out my little ones!"
And the jackal brought out first one and then another, and the last one he brought out three times, so that the whole ten seemed to be there.
The following day the same thing happened, and the next and the next and the next, till at length there was not even one left, and the rest of the day the jackal busied himself with digging a large hole at the back of the den.
That night, when the panther returned from hunting, she said to him as usual, "Jackal, bring out my little ones."
But the jackal replied: "Bring out your little ones, indeed! Why, you know as well as I do that you have eaten them all up."
Of course the panther had not the least idea what the jackal meant by this, and only repeated, "Jackal, bring out my children." As she got no answer she entered the cave, but found no jackal, for he had crawled through the hole he had made and escaped. And, what was worse, she did not find the little ones either.
Now the panther was not going to let the jackal get off like that, and set off at a trot to catch him. The jackal, however, had got a good start, and he reached a place where a swarm of bees deposited their honey in the cleft of a rock. Then he stood still and waited till the panther came up to him: "Jackal, where are my little ones?" she asked.
And the jackal answered: "They are up there. It is where I keep school."
The panther looked about, and then inquired, "But where? I see nothing of them."
"Come a little this way," said the jackal, "and you will hear how beautifully they sing."
So the panther drew near the cleft of the rock.
"Don"t you hear them?" said the jackal; "they are in there," and slipped away while the panther was listening to the song of the children.
She was still standing in the same place when a baboon went by. "What are you doing there, panther?"
"I am listening to my children singing. It is here that the jackal keeps his school."
Then the baboon seized a stick, and poked it in the cleft of the rock, exclaiming, "Well, then, I should like to see your children!"
The bees flew out in a huge swarm, and made furiously for the panther, whom they attacked on all sides, while the baboon soon climbed up out of the way, crying, as he perched himself on the branch of a tree, "I wish you joy of your children!" while from afar the jackal's voice was heard exclaiming: 'sting, her well! don"t let her go!"
The panther galloped away as if she was mad, and flung herself into the nearest lake, but every time she raised her head, the bees stung her afresh so at last the poor beast was drowned altogether.

One day Soongoo′ra, the hare, roaming through the forest in search of food, glanced up through the boughs of a very large calabash tree, and saw that a great hole in the upper part of the trunk was inhabited by bees; thereupon he returned to town in search of some one to go with him and help to get the honey.
As he was passing the house of Boo′koo, the big rat, that worthy gentleman invited him in. So he went in, sat down, and remarked: "My father has died, and has left me a hive of honey. I would like you to come and help me to eat it."
Of course Bookoo jumped at the offer, and he and the hare started off immediately.
When they arrived at the great calabash tree, Soongoora pointed out the bees" nest and said, "Go on; climb up." So, taking some straw with them, they climbed up to the nest, lit the straw, smoked out the bees, put out the fire, and set to work eating the honey.
In the midst of the feast, who should appear at the foot of the tree but Sim′ba, the lion? Looking up, and seeing them eating, he asked, "Who are you?"
Then Soongoora whispered to Bookoo, "Hold your tongue; that old fellow is crazy." But in a very little while Simba roared out angrily: "Who are you, I say? Speak, I tell you!" This made Bookoo so scared that he blurted out, "It's only us!"
Upon this the hare said to him: "You just wrap me up in this straw, call to the lion to keep out of the way, and then throw me down. Then you"ll see what will happen."
So Bookoo, the big rat, wrapped Soongoora, the hare, in the straw, and then called to Simba, the lion, "Stand back; I"m going to throw this straw down, and then I"ll come down myself." When Simba stepped back out of the way, Bookoo threw down the straw, and as it lay on the ground Soongoora crept out and ran away while the lion was looking up.
After waiting a minute or two, Simba roared out, "Well, come down, I say!" and, there being no help for it, the big rat came down.
As soon as he was within reach, the lion caught hold of him, and asked, "Who was up there with you?"
"Why," said Bookoo, "Soongoora, the hare. Didn"t you see him when I threw him down?"
"Of course I didn"t see him," replied the lion, in an incredulous tone, and, without wasting further time, he ate the big rat, and then searched around for the hare, but could not find him.
Three days later, Soongoora called on his acquaintance, Ko′bay, the tortoise, and said to him, "Let us go and eat some honey."
"Whose honey?" inquired Kobay, cautiously.
"My father's," Soongoora replied.
"Oh, all right; I"m with you," said the tortoise, eagerly; and away they went.
When they arrived at the great calabash tree they climbed up with their straw, smoked out the bees, sat down, and began to eat.
Just then Mr. Simba, who owned the honey, came out again, and, looking up, inquired, "Who are you, up there?"
Soongoora whispered to Kobay, "Keep quiet;" but when the lion repeated his question angrily, Kobay became suspicious, and said: "I will speak. You told me this honey was yours; am I right in suspecting that it belongs to Simba?"
So, when the lion asked again, "Who are you?" he answered, "It's only us." The lion said, "Come down, then;" and the tortoise answered, "We"re coming."
Now, Simba had been keeping an eye open for Soongoora since the day he caught Bookoo, the big rat, and, suspecting that he was up there with Kobay, he said to himself, "I"ve got him this time, sure."
Seeing that they were caught again, Soongoora said to the tortoise: "Wrap me up in the straw, tell Simba to stand out of the way, and then throw me down. I"ll wait for you below. He can"t hurt you, you know."
"All right," said Kobay; but while he was wrapping the hare up he said to himself: "This fellow wants to run away, and leave me to bear the lion's anger. He shall get caught first." Therefore, when he had bundled him up, he called out, "Soongoora is coming!" and threw him down.
So Simba caught the hare, and, holding him with his paw, said, "Now, what shall I do with you?" The hare replied, "It's of no use for you to try to eat me; I"m awfully tough." "What would be the best thing to do with you, then?" asked Simba.
"I think," said Soongoora, "you should take me by the tail, whirl me around, and knock me against the ground. Then you may be able to eat me."
So the lion, being deceived, took him by the tail and whirled him around, but just as he was going to knock him on the ground he slipped out of his grasp and ran away, and Simba had the mortification of losing him again.
Angry and disappointed, he turned to the tree and called to Kobay, "You come down, too."
When the tortoise reached the ground, the lion said, "You"re pretty hard; what can I do to make you eatable?"
"Oh, that's easy," laughed Kobay; "just put me in the mud and rub my back with your paw until my shell comes off."
Immediately on hearing this, Simba carried Kobay to the water, placed him in the mud, and began, as he supposed, to rub his back; but the tortoise had slipped away, and the lion continued rubbing on a piece of rock until his paws were raw. When he glanced down at them he saw they were bleeding, and, realizing that he had again been outwitted, he said, "Well, the hare has done me to-day, but I"ll go hunting now until I find him."
So Simba, the lion, set out immediately in search of Soongoora, the hare, and as he went along he inquired of every one he met, "Where is the house of Soongoora?" But each person he asked answered, "I do not know." For the hare had said to his wife, "Let us remove from this house." Therefore the folks in that neighborhood had no knowledge of his whereabouts. Simba, however, went along, continuing his inquiries, until presently one answered, "That is his house on the top of the mountain."
Without loss of time the lion climbed the mountain, and soon arrived at the place indicated, only to find that there was no one at home. This, however, did not trouble him; on the contrary, saying to himself, "I"ll hide myself inside, and when Soongoora and his wife come home I"ll eat them both," he entered the house and lay down, awaiting their arrival.
Pretty soon along came the hare with his wife, not thinking of any danger; but he very soon discovered the marks of the lion's paws on the steep path. Stopping at once, he said to Mrs. Soongoora: "You go back, my dear. Simba, the lion, has passed this way, and I think he must be looking for me."
But she replied, "I will not go back; I will follow you, my husband."
Although greatly pleased at this proof of his wife's affection, Soongoora said firmly: "No, no; you have friends to go to. Go back."
So he persuaded her, and she went back; but he kept on, following the footmarks, and saw—as he had suspected—that they went into his house.
"Ah!" said he to himself, "Mr. Lion is inside, is he?" Then, cautiously going back a little way, he called out: "How d"ye do, house? How d"ye do?" Waiting a moment, he remarked loudly: "Well, this is very strange! Every day, as I pass this place, I say, "How d"ye do, house?" and the house always answers, "How d"ye do?" There must be some one inside to-day."
When the lion heard this he called out, "How d"ye do?"
Then Soongoora burst out laughing, and shouted: "Oho, Mr. Simba! You"re inside, and I"ll bet you want to eat me; but first tell me where you ever heard of a house talking!"
Upon this the lion, seeing how he had been fooled, replied angrily, "You wait until I get hold of you; that's all."
"Oh, I think you"ll have to do the waiting," cried the hare; and then he ran away, the lion following.
But it was of no use. Soongoora completely tired out old Simba, who, saying, "That rascal has beaten me; I don"t want to have anything more to do with him," returned to his home under the great calabash tree.

Once there was a man named Go′so, who taught children to read, not in a schoolhouse, but under a calabash tree. One evening, while Goso was sitting under the tree deep in the study of the next day's lessons, Paa, the gazelle, climbed up the tree very quietly to steal some fruit, and in so doing shook off a calabash, which, in falling, struck the teacher on the head and killed him.
When his scholars came in the morning and found their teacher lying dead, they were filled with grief; so, after giving him a decent burial, they agreed among themselves to find the one who had killed Goso, and put him to death.
After talking the matter over they came to the conclusion that the south wind was the offender.
So they caught the south wind and beat it.
But the south wind cried: "Here! I am Koo′see, the south wind. Why are you beating me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Koosee; it was you who threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Koosee said, "If I were so powerful would I be stopped by a mud wall?"
So they went to the mud wall and beat it.
But the mud wall cried: "Here! I am Keeyambaa′za, the mud wall. Why are you beating me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Keeyambaaza; it was you who stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Keeyambaaza said, "If I were so powerful would I be bored through by the rat?"
So they went and caught the rat and beat it.
But the rat cried: "Here! I am Paan′ya, the rat. Why are you beating me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Paanya; it was you who bored through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Paanya said, "If I were so powerful would I be eaten by a cat?"
So they hunted for the cat, caught it, and beat it.
But the cat cried: "Here! I am Paa′ka, the cat. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Paaka; it is you that eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Paaka said, "If I were so powerful would I be tied by a rope?"
So they took the rope and beat it.
But the rope cried: "Here! I am Kaam′ba, the rope. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Kaamba; it is you that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Kaamba said, "If I were so powerful would I be cut by a knife?"
So they took the knife and beat it.
But the knife cried: "Here! I am Kee′soo, the knife. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Keesoo; you cut Kaamba, the rope; that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Keesoo said, "If I were so powerful would I be burned by the fire?"
And they went and beat the fire.
But the fire cried: "Here! I am Mo′to, the fire. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Moto; you burn Keesoo, the knife; that cuts Kaamba, the rope; that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Moto said, "If I were so powerful would I be put out by water?"
And they went to the water and beat it.
But the water cried: "Here! I am Maa′jee, the water. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Maajee; you put out Moto, the fire; that burns Keesoo, the knife; that cuts Kaamba, the rope; that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Maajee said, "If I were so powerful would I be drunk by the ox?"
And they went to the ox and beat it.
But the ox cried: "Here! I am Ng"om′bay, the ox. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Ng"ombay; you drink Maajee, the water; that puts out Moto, the fire; that burns Keesoo, the knife; that cuts Kaamba, the rope; that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Ng"ombay said, "If I were so powerful would I be tormented by the fly?"
And they caught a fly and beat it.
But the fly cried: "Here! I am Een′zee, the fly. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Eenzee; you torment Ng"ombay, the ox; who drinks Maajee, the water; that puts out Moto, the fire; that burns Keesoo, the knife; that cuts Kaamba, the rope; that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
But Eenzee said, "If I were so powerful would I be eaten by the gazelle?"
And they searched for the gazelle, and when they found it they beat it.
But the gazelle said: "Here! I am Paa, the gazelle. Why do you beat me? What have I done?"
And they said: "Yes, we know you are Paa; you eat Eenzee, the fly; that torments Ng"ombay, the ox; who drinks Maajee, the water; that puts out Moto, the fire; that burns Keesoo, the knife; that cuts Kaamba, the rope; that ties Paaka, the cat; who eats Paanya, the rat; who bores through Keeyambaaza, the mud wall; which stopped Koosee, the south wind; and Koosee, the south wind, threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. You should not have done it."
The gazelle, through surprise at being found out and fear of the consequences of his accidental killing of the teacher, while engaged in stealing, was struck dumb.
Then the scholars said: "Ah! he hasn"t a word to say for himself. This is the fellow who threw down the calabash that struck our teacher Goso. We will kill him."
So they killed Paa, the gazelle, and avenged the death of their teacher.

Long, long ago there lived, in a village called Keejee′jee, a woman whose husband died, leaving her with a little baby boy. She worked hard all day to get food for herself and child, but they lived very poorly and were most of the time half-starved.
When the boy, whose name was "Mvoo′ Laa′na, began to get big, he said to his mother, one day: "Mother, we are always hungry. What work did my father do to support us?"
His mother replied: "Your father was a hunter. He set traps, and we ate what he caught in them."
"Oho!" said "Mvoo Laana; "that's not work; that's fun. I, too, will set traps, and see if we can"t get enough to eat."
The next day he went into the forest and cut branches from the trees, and returned home in the evening.
The second day he spent making the branches into traps.
The third day he twisted cocoanut fiber into ropes.
The fourth day he set up as many traps as time would permit.
The fifth day he set up the remainder of the traps.
The sixth day he went to examine the traps, and they had caught so much game, beside what they needed for themselves, that he took a great quantity to the big town of Oongoo′ja, where he sold it and bought corn and other things, and the house was full of food; and, as this good fortune continued, he and his mother lived very comfortably.
But after a while, when he went to his traps he found nothing in them day after day.
One morning, however, he found that an ape had been caught in one of the traps, and he was about to kill it, when it said: "Son of Adam, I am Neea′nee, the ape; do not kill me. Take me out of this trap and let me go. Save me from the rain, that I may come and save you from the sun some day."
So "Mvoo Laana took him out of the trap and let him go.
When Neeanee had climbed up in a tree, he sat on a branch and said to the youth: "For your kindness I will give you a piece of advice: Believe me, men are all bad. Never do a good turn for a man; if you do, he will do you harm at the first opportunity."
The second day, "Mvoo Laana found a snake in the same trap. He started to the village to give the alarm, but the snake shouted: "Come back, son of Adam; don"t call the people from the village to come and kill me. I am Neeo′ka, the snake. Let me out of this trap, I pray you. Save me from the rain to-day, that I may be able to save you from the sun to-morrow, if you should be in need of help."
So the youth let him go; and as he went he said, "I will return your kindness if I can, but do not trust any man; if you do him a kindness he will do you an injury in return at the first opportunity."
The third day, "Mvoo Laana found a lion in the same trap that had caught the ape and the snake, and he was afraid to go near it. But the lion said: "Don"t run away; I am Sim′ba Kong′way, the very old lion. Let me out of this trap, and I will not hurt you. Save me from the rain, that I may save you from the sun if you should need help."
So "Mvoo Laana believed him and let him out of the trap, and Simba Kongway, before going his way, said: "Son of Adam, you have been kind to me, and I will repay you with kindness if I can; but never do a kindness to a man, or he will pay you back with unkindness."
The next day a man was caught in the same trap, and when the youth released him, he repeatedly assured him that he would never forget the service he had done him in restoring his liberty and saving his life.
Well, it seemed that he had caught all the game that could be taken in traps, and "Mvoo Laana and his mother were hungry every day, with nothing to satisfy them, as they had been before. At last he said to his mother, one day: "Mother, make me seven cakes of the little meal we have left, and I will go hunting with my bow and arrows." So she baked him the cakes, and he took them and his bow and arrows and went into the forest.
The youth walked and walked, but could see no game, and finally he found that he had lost his way, and had eaten all his cakes but one.
And he went on and on, not knowing whether he was going away from his home or toward it, until he came to the wildest and most desolate looking wood he had ever seen. He was so wretched and tired that he felt he must lie down and die, when suddenly he heard some one calling him, and looking up he saw Neeanee, the ape, who said, "Son of Adam, where are you going?"
"I don"t know," replied "Mvoo Laana, sadly; "I"m lost."
"Well, well," said the ape; "don"t worry. Just sit down here and rest yourself until I come back, and I will repay with kindness the kindness you once showed me."
Then Neeanee went away off to some gardens and stole a whole lot of ripe paw-paws and bananas, and brought them to "Mvoo Laana, and said: "Here's plenty of food for you. Is there anything else you want? Would you like a drink?" And before the youth could answer he ran off with a calabash and brought it back full of water. So the youth ate heartily, and drank all the water he needed, and then each said to the other, "Good-bye, till we meet again," and went their separate ways.
When "Mvoo Laana had walked a great deal farther without finding which way he should go, he met Simba Kongway, who asked, "Where are you going, son of Adam?"
And the youth answered, as dolefully as before, "I don"t know; I"m lost."
"Come, cheer up," said the very old lion, "and rest yourself here a little. I want to repay with kindness to-day the kindness you showed me on a former day."
So "Mvoo Laana sat down. Simba Kongway went away, but soon returned with some game he had caught, and then he brought some fire, and the young man cooked the game and ate it. When he had finished he felt a great deal better, and they bade each other good-bye for the present, and each went his way.
After he had traveled another very long distance the youth came to a farm, and was met by a very, very old woman, who said to him: "Stranger, my husband has been taken very sick, and I am looking for some one to make him some medicine. Won"t you make it?" But he answered: "My good woman, I am not a doctor, I am a hunter, and never used medicine in my life. I can not help you."
When he came to the road leading to the principal city he saw a well, with a bucket standing near it, and he said to himself: "That's just what I want. I"ll take a drink of nice well-water. Let me see if the water can be reached."
As he peeped over the edge of the well, to see if the water was high enough, what should he behold but a great big snake, which, directly it saw him, said, "Son of Adam, wait a moment." Then it came out of the well and said: "How? Don"t you know me?"
"I certainly do not," said the youth, stepping back a little.
"Well, well!" said the snake; "I could never forget you. I am Neeoka, whom you released from the trap. You know I said, 'save me from the rain, and I will save you from the sun." Now, you are a stranger in the town to which you are going; therefore hand me your little bag, and I will place in it the things that will be of use to you when you arrive there."
So "Mvoo Laana gave Neeoka the little bag, and he filled it with chains of gold and silver, and told him to use them freely for his own benefit. Then they parted very cordially.
When the youth reached the city, the first man he met was he whom he had released from the trap, who invited him to go home with him, which he did, and the man's wife made him supper.
As soon as he could get away unobserved, the man went to the sultan and said: "There is a stranger come to my house with a bag full of chains of silver and gold, which he says he got from a snake that lives in a well. But although he pretends to be a man, I know that he is a snake who has power to look like a man."
When the sultan heard this he sent some soldiers who brought "Mvoo Laana and his little bag before him. When they opened the little bag, the man who was released from the trap persuaded the people that some evil would come out of it, and affect the children of the sultan and the children of the vizir.
Then the people became excited, and tied the hands of "Mvoo Laana behind him.
But the great snake had come out of the well and arrived at the town just about this time, and he went and lay at the feet of the man who had said all those bad things about "Mvoo Laana, and when the people saw this they said to that man: "How is this? There is the great snake that lives in the well, and he stays by you. Tell him to go away."
But Neeoka would not stir. So they untied the young man's hands, and tried in every way to make amends for having suspected him of being a wizard.
Then the sultan asked him, "Why should this man invite you to his home and then speak ill of you?"
And "Mvoo Laana related all that had happened to him, and how the ape, the snake, and the lion had cautioned him about the results of doing any kindness for a man.
And the sultan said: "Although men are often ungrateful, they are not always so; only the bad ones. As for this fellow, he deserves to be put in a sack and drowned in the sea. He was treated kindly, and returned evil for good."

In a country which is full of wild beasts of all sorts there once lived a jackal and a hedgehog, and, unlike though they were, the two animals made great friends, and were often seen in each other's company.
One afternoon they were walking along a road together, when the jackal, who was the taller of the two, exclaimed:
"Oh! there is a barn full of corn; let us go and eat some."
"Yes, do let us!" answered the hedgehog. So they went to the barn, and ate till they could eat no more. Then the jackal put on his shoes, which he had taken off so as to make no noise, and they returned to the high road.
After they had gone some way they met a panther, who stopped, and bowing politely, said:
"Excuse my speaking to you, but I cannot help admiring those shoes of yours. Do you mind telling me who made them?"
"Yes, I think they are rather nice," answered the jackal; "I made them myself, though."
"Could you make me a pair like them?" asked the panther eagerly.
"I would do my best, of course," replied the jackal; "but you must kill me a cow, and when we have eaten the flesh I will take the skin and make your shoes out of it."
So the panther prowled about until he saw a fine cow grazing apart from the rest of the herd. He killed it instantly, and then gave a cry to the jackal and hedgehog to come to the place where he was. They soon skinned the dead beasts, and spread its skin out to dry, after which they had a grand feast before they curled themselves up for the night, and slept soundly.
Next morning the jackal got up early and set to work upon the shoes, while the panther sat by and looked on with delight. At last they were finished, and the jackal arose and stretched himself.
"Now go and lay them in the sun out there," said he; "in a couple of hours they will be ready to put on; but do not attempt to wear them before, or you will feel them most uncomfortable. But I see the sun is high in the heavens, and we must be continuing our journey."
The panther, who always believed what everybody told him, did exactly as he was bid, and in two hours" time began to fasten on the shoes. They certainly set off his paws wonderfully, and he stretched out his forepaws and looked at them with pride. But when he tried to walk–ah! that was another story! They were so stiff and hard that he nearly shrieked every step he took, and at last he sank down where he was, and actually began to cry.
After some time some little partridges who were hopping about heard the poor panther's groans, and went up to see what was the matter. He had never tried to make his dinner off them, and they had always been quite friendly.
"You seem in pain," said one of them, fluttering close to him, "can we help you?"
"Oh, it is the jackal! He made me these shoes; they are so hard and tight that they hurt my feet, and I cannot manage to kick them off."
"Lie still, and we will soften them," answered the kind little partridge. And calling to his brothers, they all flew to the nearest spring, and carried water in their beaks, which they poured over the shoes. This they did till the hard leather grew soft, and the panther was able to slip his feet out of them.
"Oh, thank you, thank you," he cried, skipping round with joy. "I feel a different creature. Now I will go after the jackal and pay him my debts." And he bounded away into the forest.
But the jackal had been very cunning, and had trotted backwards and forwards and in and out, so that it was very difficult to know which track he had really followed. At length, however, the panther caught sight of his enemy, at the same moment that the jackal had caught sight of him. The panther gave a loud roar, and sprang forward, but the jackal was too quick for him and plunged into a dense thicket, where the panther could not follow.
Disgusted with his failure, but more angry than ever, the panther lay down for a while to consider what he should do next, and as he was thinking, an old man came by.
"Oh! father, tell me how I can repay the jackal for the way he has served me!" And without more ado he told his story.
"If you take my advice," answered the old man, "you will kill a cow, and invite all the jackals in the forest to the feast. Watch them carefully while they are eating, and you will see that most of them keep their eyes on their food. But if one of them glances at you, you will know that is the traitor."
The panther, whose manners were always good, thanked the old man, and followed his counsel. The cow was killed, and the partridges flew about with invitations to the jackals, who gathered in large numbers to the feast. The wicked jackal came amongst them; but as the panther had only seen him once he could not distinguish him from the rest. However, they all took their places on wooden seats placed round the dead cow, which was laid across the boughs of a fallen tree, and began their dinner, each jackal fixing his eyes greedily on the piece of meat before him. Only one of them seemed uneasy, and every now and then glanced in the direction of his host. This the panther noticed, and suddenly made a bound at the culprit and seized his tail; but again the jackal was too quick for him, and catching up a knife he cut off his tail and darted into the forest, followed by all the rest of the party. And before the panther had recovered from his surprise he found himself alone.
"What am I to do now?" he asked the old man, who soon came back to see how things had turned out.
"It is very unfortunate, certainly," answered he; "but I think I know where you can find him. There is a melon garden about two miles from here, and as jackals are very fond of melons they are nearly sure to have gone there to feed. If you see a tailless jackal you will know that he is the one you want." So the panther thanked him and went his way.
Now the jackal had guessed what advice the old man would give his enemy, and so, while his friends were greedily eating the ripest melons in the sunniest corner of the garden, he stole behind them and tied their tails together. He had only just finished when his ears caught the sound of breaking branches; and he cried: "Quick! quick! here comes the master of the garden!" And the jackals sprang up and ran away in all directions, leaving their tails behind them. And how was the panther to know which was his enemy?
"They none of them had any tails," he said sadly to the old man, "and I am tired of hunting them. I shall leave them alone and go and catch something for supper."
Of course the hedgehog had not been able to take part in any of these adventures; but as soon as all danger was over, the jackal went to look for his friend, whom he was lucky enough to find at home.
"Ah, there you are," he said gaily. "I have lost my tail since I saw you last. And other people have lost theirs too; but that is no matter! I am hungry, so come with me to the shepherd who is sitting over there, and we will ask him to sell us one of his sheep."
"Yes, that is a good plan," answered the hedgehog. And he walked as fast as his little legs would go to keep up with the jackal. When they reached the shepherd the jackal pulled out his purse from under his foreleg, and made his bargain.
"Only wait till to-morrow," said the shepherd, "and I will give you the biggest sheep you ever saw. But he always feeds at some distance from the rest of the flock, and it would take me a long time to catch him."
"Well, it is very tiresome, but I suppose I must wait," replied the jackal. And he and the hedgehog looked about for a nice dry cave in which to make themselves comfortable for the night. But, after they had gone, the shepherd killed one of his sheep, and stripped off his skin, which he sewed tightly round a greyhound he had with him, and put a cord round its neck. Then he lay down and went to sleep.
Very, very early, before the sun was properly up, the jackal and the hedgehog were pulling at the shepherd's cloak.
"Wake up," they said, "and give us that sheep. We have had nothing to eat all night, and are very hungry."
The shepherd yawned and rubbed his eyes. "He is tied up to that tree; go and take him." So they went to the tree and unfastened the cord, and turned to go back to the cave where they had slept, dragging the greyhound after them. When they reached the cave the jackal said to the hedgehog.
"Before I kill him let me see whether he is fat or thin." And he stood a little way back, so that he might the better examine the animal. After looking at him, with his head on one side, for a minute or two, he nodded gravely.
"He is quite fat enough; he is a good sheep."
But the hedgehog, who sometimes showed more cunning than anyone would have guessed, answered:
"My friend, you are talking nonsense. The wool is indeed a sheep's wool, but the paws of my uncle the greyhound peep out from underneath."
"He is a sheep," repeated the jackal, who did not like to think anyone cleverer than himself.
"Hold the cord while I look at him," answered the hedgehog.
Very unwillingly the jackal held the rope, while the hedgehog walked slowly round the greyhound till he reached the jackal again. He knew quite well by the paws and tail that it was a greyhound and not a sheep, that the shepherd had sold them; and as he could not tell what turn affairs might take, he resolved to get out of the way.
"Oh! yes, you are right," he said to the jackal; "but I never can eat till I have first drunk. I will just go and quench my thirst from that spring at the edge of the wood, and then I shall be ready for breakfast."
"Don"t be long, then," called the jackal, as the hedgehog hurried off at his best pace. And he lay down under a rock to wait for him.
More than an hour passed by and the hedgehog had had plenty of time to go to the spring and back, and still there was no sign of him. And this was very natural, as he had hidden himself in some long grass under a tree!
At length the jackal guessed that for some reason his friend had run away, and determined to wait for his breakfast no longer. So he went up to the place where the greyhound had been tethered and untied the rope. But just as he was about to spring on his back and give him a deadly bite, the jackal heard a low growl, which never proceeded from the throat of any sheep. Like a flash of lightning the jackal threw down the cord and was flying across the plain; but though his legs were long, the greyhound's legs were longer still, and he soon came up with his prey. The jackal turned to fight, but he was no match for the greyhound, and in a few minutes he was lying dead on the ground, while the greyhound was trotting peacefully back to the shepherd.

Now, though the jackal was dead, he had left two sons behind him, every whit as cunning and tricky as their father. The elder of the two was a fine handsome creature, who had a pleasant manner and made many friends. The animal he saw most of was a hyena; and one day, when they were taking a walk together, they picked up a beautiful green cloak, which had evidently been dropped by some one riding across the plain on a camel. Of course each wanted to have it, and they almost quarrelled over the matter; but at length it was settled that the hyena should wear the cloak by day and the jackal by night. After a little while, however, the jackal became discontented with this arrangement, declaring that none of his friends, who were quite different from those of the hyena, could see the splendour of the mantle, and that it was only fair that he should sometimes be allowed to wear it by day. To this the hyena would by no means consent, and they were on the eve of a quarrel when the hyena proposed that they should ask the lion to judge between them. The jackal agreed to this, and the hyena wrapped the cloak about him, and they both trotted off to the lion's den.
The jackal, who was fond of talking, at once told the story; and when it was finished the lion turned to the hyena and asked if it was true.
"Quite true, your majesty," answered the hyena.
"Then lay the cloak on the ground at my feet," said the lion, "and I will give my judgment." So the mantle was spread upon the red earth, the hyena and the jackal standing on each side of it.
There was silence for a few moments, and then the lion sat up, looking very great and wise.
"My judgment is that the garment shall belong wholly to whoever first rings the bell of the nearest mosque at dawn to-morrow. Now go; for much business awaits me!"
All that night the hyena sat up, fearing lest the jackal should reach the bell before him, for the mosque was close at hand. With the first streak of dawn he bounded away to the bell, just as the jackal, who had slept soundly all night, was rising to his feet.
"Good luck to you," cried the jackal. And throwing the cloak over his back he darted away across the plain, and was seen no more by his friend the hyena.
After running several miles the jackal thought he was safe from pursuit, and seeing a lion and another hyena talking together, he strolled up to join them.
"Good morning," he said; "may I ask what is the matter? You seem very serious about something."
"Pray sit down," answered the lion. "We were wondering in which direction we should go to find the best dinner. The hyena wishes to go to the forest, and I to the mountains. What do you say?"
"Well, as I was sauntering over the plain, just now, I noticed a flock of sheep grazing, and some of them had wandered into a little valley quite out of sight of the shepherd. If you keep among the rocks you will never be observed. But perhaps you will allow me to go with you and show you the way?"
"You are really very kind," answered the lion. And they crept steadily along till at length they reached the mouth of the valley where a ram, a sheep and a lamb were feeding on the rich grass, unconscious of their danger.
"How shall we divide them?" asked the lion in a whisper to the hyena.
"Oh, it is easily done," replied the hyena. "The lamb for me, the sheep for the jackal, and the ram for the lion."
'so I am to have that lean creature, which is nothing but horns, am I?" cried the lion in a rage. "I will teach you to divide things in that manner!" And he gave the hyena two great blows, which stretched him dead in a moment. Then he turned to the jackal and said: "How would you divide them?"
"Quite differently from the hyena," replied the jackal. "You will breakfast off the lamb, you will dine off the sheep, and you will sup off the ram."
"Dear me, how clever you are! Who taught you such wisdom?" exclaimed the lion, looking at him admiringly.
"The fate of the hyena," answered the jackal, laughing, and running off at his best speed; for he saw two men armed with spears coming close behind the lion!
The jackal continued to run till at last he could run no longer. He flung himself under a tree panting for breath, when he heard a rustle amongst the grass, and his father's old friend the hedgehog appeared before him.
"Oh, is it you?" asked the little creature; "how strange that we should meet so far from home!"
"I have just had a narrow escape of my life," gasped the jackal, "and I need some sleep. After that we must think of something to do to amuse ourselves." And he lay down again and slept soundly for a couple of hours.
"Now I am ready," said he; "have you anything to propose?"
"In a valley beyond those trees," answered the hedgehog, "there is a small farmhouse where the best butter in the world is made. I know their ways, and in an hour's time the farmer's wife will be off to milk the cows, which she keeps at some distance. We could easily get in at the window of the shed where she keeps the butter, and I will watch, lest some one should come unexpectedly, while you have a good meal. Then you shall watch, and I will eat."
"That sounds a good plan," replied the jackal; and they set off together.
But when they reached the farmhouse the jackal said to the hedgehog: "Go in and fetch the pots of butter and I will hide them in a safe place."
"Oh no," cried the hedgehog, "I really couldn"t. They would find out directly! And, besides, it is so different just eating a little now and then."
"Do as I bid you at once," said the jackal, looking at the hedgehog so sternly that the little fellow dared say no more, and soon rolled the jars to the window where the jackal lifted them out one by one.
When they were all in a row before him he gave a sudden start.
"Run for your life," he whispered to his companion; "I see the woman coming over the hill!" And the hedgehog, his heart beating, set off as fast as he could. The jackal remained where he was, shaking with laughter, for the woman was not in sight at all, and he had only sent the hedgehog away because he did not want him to know where the jars of butter were buried. But every day he stole out to their hiding-place and had a delicious feast.
At length, one morning, the hedgehog suddenly said:
"You never told me what you did with those jars?"
"Oh, I hid them safely till the farm people should have forgotten all about them," replied the jackal. "But as they are still searching for them we must wait a little longer, and then I"ll bring them home, and we will share them between us."
So the hedgehog waited and waited; but every time he asked if there was no chance of getting jars of butter the jackal put him off with some excuse. After a while the hedgehog became suspicious, and said:
"I should like to know where you have hidden them. To-night, when it is quite dark, you shall show me the place."
"I really can"t tell you," answered the jackal. "You talk so much that you would be sure to confide the secret to somebody, and then we should have had our trouble for nothing, besides running the risk of our necks being broken by the farmer. I can see that he is getting disheartened, and very soon he will give up the search. Have patience just a little longer."
The hedgehop said no more, and pretended to be satisfied; but when some days had gone by he woke the jackal, who was sleeping soundly after a hunt which had lasted several hours.
"I have just had notice," remarked the hedgehog, shaking him, "that my family wish to have a banquet to-morrow, and they have invited you to it. Will you come?"
"Certainly," answered the jackal, "with pleasure. But as I have to go out in the morning you can meet me on the road."
"That will do very well," replied the hedgehog. And the jackal went to sleep again, for he was obliged to be up early.
Punctual to the moment the hedgehog arrived at the place appointed for their meeting, and as the jackal was not there he sat down and waited for him.
"Ah, there you are!" he cried, when the dusky yellow form at last turned the corner. "I had nearly given you up! Indeed, I almost wish you had not come, for I hardly know where I shall hide you."
"Why should you hide me anywhere?" asked the jackal. "What is the matter with you?"
"Well, so many of the guests have brought their dogs and mules with them, that I fear it may hardly be safe for you to go amongst them. No; don"t run off that way," he added quickly, "because there is another troop that are coming over the hill. Lie down here, and I will throw these sacks over you; and keep still for your life, whatever happens."
And what did happen was, that when the jackal was lying covered up, under a little hill, the hedgehog set a great stone rolling, which crushed him to death.

Once upon a time there lived an old man who dwelt with his son in a small hut on the edge of the plain. He was very old, and had worked very hard, and when at last he was struck down by illness he felt that he should never rise from his bed again.
So, one day, he bade his wife summon their son, when he came back from his journey to the nearest town, where he had been to buy bread.
"Come hither, my son," said he; "I know myself well to be dying, and I have nothing to leave you but my falcon, my cat and my greyhound; but if you make good use of them you will never lack food. Be good to your mother, as you have been to me. And now farewell!"
Then he turned his face to the wall and died.
There was great mourning in the hut for many days, but at length the son rose up, and calling to his greyhound, his cat and his falcon, he left the house saying that he would bring back something for dinner. Wandering over the plain, he noticed a troop of gazelles, and pointed to his greyhound to give chase. The dog soon brought down a fine fat beast, and slinging it over his shoulders, the young man turned homewards. On the way, however, he passed a pond, and as he approached a cloud of birds flew into the air. Shaking his wrist, the falcon seated on it darted into the air, and swooped down upon the quarry he had marked, which fell dead to the ground. The young man picked it up, and put it in his pouch and then went towards home again.
Near the hut was a small barn in which he kept the produce of the little patch of corn, which grew close to the garden. Here a rat ran out almost under his feet, followed by another and another; but quick as thought the cat was upon them and not one escaped her.
When all the rats were killed, the young man left the barn. He took the path leading to the door of the hut, but stopped on feeling a hand laid on his shoulder.
"Young man," said the ogre (for such was the stranger), "you have been a good son, and you deserve the piece of luck which has befallen you this day. Come with me to that shining lake yonder, and fear nothing."
Wondering a little at what might be going to happen to him, the youth did as the ogre bade him, and when they reached the shore of the lake, the ogre turned and said to him:
'step into the water and shut your eyes! You will find yourself sinking slowly to the bottom; but take courage, all will go well. Only bring up as much silver as you can carry, and we will divide it between us."
So the young man stepped bravely into the lake, and felt himself sinking, sinking, till he reached firm ground at last. In front of him lay four heaps of silver, and in the midst of them a curious white shining stone, marked over with strange characters, such as he had never seen before. He picked it up in order to examine it more closely, and as he held it the stone spoke.
"As long as you hold me, all your wishes will come true," it said. "But hide me in your turban, and then call to the ogre that you are ready to come up."
In a few minutes the young man stood again by the shores of the lake.
"Well, where is the silver?" asked the ogre, who was awaiting him.
"Ah, my father, how can I tell you! So bewildered was I, and so dazzled with the splendours of everything I saw, that I stood like a statue, unable to move. Then hearing steps approaching I got frightened, and called to you, as you know."
"You are no better than the rest," cried the ogre, and turned away in a rage.
When he was out of sight the young man took the stone from his turban and looked at it. "I want the finest camel that can be found, and the most splendid garments," said he.
'shut your eyes then," replied the stone. And he shut them; and when he opened them again the camel that he had wished for was standing before him, while the festal robes of a desert prince hung from his shoulders. Mounting the camel, he whistled the falcon to his wrist, and, followed by his greyhound and his cat, he started homewards.
His mother was sewing at her door when this magnificent stranger rode up, and, filled with surprise, she bowed low before him.
"Don"t you know me, mother?" he said with a laugh. And on hearing his voice the good woman nearly fell to the ground with astonishment.
"How have you got that camel and those clothes?" asked she. "Can a son of mine have committed murder in order to possess them?"
"Do not be afraid; they are quite honestly come by," answered the youth. "I will explain all by-and-by; but now you must go to the palace and tell the king I wish to marry his daughter."
At these words the mother thought her son had certainly gone mad, and stared blankly at him. The young man guessed what was in her heart, and replied with a smile:
"Fear nothing. Promise all that he asks; it will be fulfilled somehow."
So she went to the palace, where she found the king sitting in the Hall of Justice listening to the petitions of his people. The woman waited until all had been heard and the hall was empty, and then went up and knelt before the throne.
"My son has sent me to ask for the hand of the princess," said she.
The king looked at her and thought that she was mad; but, instead of ordering his guards to turn her out, he answered gravely:
"Before he can marry the princess he must build me a palace of ice, which can be warmed with fires, and wherein the rarest singing- birds can live!"
"It shall be done, your Majesty," said she, and got up and left the hall.
Her son was anxiously awaiting her outside the palace gates, dressed in the clothes that he wore every day.
"Well, what have I got to do?" he asked impatiently, drawing his mother aside so that no one could overhear them.
"Oh, something quite impossible; and I hope you will put the princess out of your head," she replied.
"Well, but what is it?" persisted he.
"Nothing but to build a palace of ice wherein fires can burn that shall keep it so warm that the most delicate singing-birds can live in it!"
"I thought it would be something much harder than that," exclaimed the young man. "I will see about it at once." And leaving his mother, he went into the country and took the stone from his turban.
"I want a palace of ice that can be warmed with fires and filled with the rarest singing-birds!"
'shut your eyes, then," said the stone; and he shut them, and when he opened them again there was the palace, more beautiful than anything he could have imagined, the fires throwing a soft pink glow over the ice.
"It is fit even for the princess," thought he to himself.
As soon as the king awoke next morning he ran to the window, and there across the plain he beheld the palace.
"That young man must be a great wizard; he may be useful to me." And when the mother came again to tell him that his orders had been fulfilled he received her with great honour, and bade her tell her son that the wedding was fixed for the following day.
The princess was delighted with her new home, and with her husband also; and several days slipped happily by, spent in turning over all the beautiful things that the palace contained. But at length the young man grew tired of always staying inside walls, and he told his wife that the next day he must leave her for a few hours, and go out hunting. "You will not mind?" he asked. And she answered as became a good wife:
"Yes, of course I shall mind; but I will spend the day in planning out some new dresses; and then it will be so delightful when you come back, you know!"
So the husband went off to hunt, with the falcon on his wrist, and the greyhound and the cat behind him–for the palace was so warm that even the cat did not mind living in it.
No sooner had he gone, than the ogre who had been watching his chance for many days, knocked at the door of the palace.
"I have just returned from a far country," he said, "and I have some of the largest and most brilliant stones in the world with me. The princess is known to love beautiful things, perhaps she might like to buy some?"
Now the princess had been wondering for many days what trimming she should put on her dresses, so that they should outshine the dresses of the other ladies at the court balls. Nothing that she thought of seemed good enough, so, when the message was brought that the ogre and his wares were below, she at once ordered that he should be brought to her chamber.
Oh! what beautiful stones he laid before her; what lovely rubies, and what rare pearls! No other lady would have jewels like those–of that the princess was quite sure; but she cast down her eyes so that the ogre might not see how much she longed for them.
"I fear they are too costly for me," she said carelessly; "and besides, I have hardly need of any more jewels just now."
"I have no particular wish to sell them myself," answered the ogre, with equal indifference. "But I have a necklace of shining stones which was left me by father, and one, the largest engraven with weird characters, is missing. I have heard that it is in your husband's possession, and if you can get me that stone you shall have any of these jewels that you choose. But you will have to pretend that you want it for yourself; and, above all, do not mention me, for he sets great store by it, and would never part with it to a stranger! To-morrow I will return with some jewels yet finer than those I have with me to-day. So, madam, farewell!"
Left alone, the princess began to think of many things, but chiefly as to whether she would persuade her husband to give her the stone or not. At one moment she felt he had already bestowed so much upon her that it was a shame to ask for the only object he had kept back. No, it would be mean; she could not do it! But then, those diamonds, and those string of pearls! After all, they had only been married a week, and the pleasure of giving it to her ought to be far greater than the pleasure of keeping it for himself. And she was sure it would be!
Well, that evening, when the young man had supped off his favourite dishes which the princess took care to have specially prepared for him, she sat down close beside him, and began stroking his head. For some time she did not speak, but listened attentively to all the adventures that had befallen him that day.
"But I was thinking of you all the time," said he at the end, "and wishing that I could bring you back something you would like. But, alas! what is there that you do not possess already?"
"How good of you not to forget me when you are in the midst of such dangers and hardships," answered she. "Yes, it is true I have many beautiful things; but if you want to give me a present–and to-morrow is my birthday–there IS one thing that I wish for very much."
"And what is that? Of course you shall have it directly!" he asked eagerly.
"It is that bright stone which fell out of the folds of your turban a few days ago," she answered, playing with his finger; "the little stone with all those funny marks upon it. I never saw any stone like it before."
The young man did not answer at first; then he said, slowly:
"I have promised, and therefore I must perform. But will you swear never to part from it, and to keep it safely about you always? More I cannot tell you, but I beg you earnestly to take heed to this."
The princess was a little startled by his manner, and began to be sorry that she had every listened to the ogre. But she did not like to draw back, and pretended to be immensely delighted at her new toy, and kissed and thanked her husband for it.
"After all I needn"t give it to the ogre," thought she as she dropped off to sleep.
Unluckily the next morning the young man went hunting again, and the ogre, who was watching, knew this, and did not come till much later than before. At the moment that he knocked at the door of the palace the princess had tired of all her employments, and her attendants were at their wits" end how to amuse her, when a tall negro dressed in scarlet came to announce that the ogre was below, and desired to know if the princess would speak to him.
"Bring him hither at once!" cried she, springing up from her cushions, and forgetting all her resolves of the previous night. In another moment she was bending with rapture over the glittering gems.
"Have you got it?" asked the ogre in a whisper, for the princess's ladies were standing as near as they dared to catch a glimpse of the beautiful jewels.
"Yes, here," she answered, slipping the stone from her sash and placing it among the rest. Then she raised her voice, and began to talk quickly of the prices of the chains and necklaces, and after some bargaining, to deceive the attendants, she declared that she liked one string of pearls better than all the rest, and that the ogre might take away the other things, which were not half as valuable as he supposed.
"As you please, madam," said he, bowing himself out of the palace.
Soon after he had gone a curious thing happened. The princess carelessly touched the wall of her room, which was wont to reflect the warm red light of the fire on the hearth, and found her hand quite wet. She turned round, and–was it her fancy? or did the fire burn more dimly than before? Hurriedly she passed into the picture gallery, where pools of water showed here and there on the floor, and a cold chill ran through her whole body. At that instant her frightened ladies came running down the stairs, crying:
"Madam! madam! what has happened? The palace is disappearing under our eyes!"
"My husband will be home very soon," answered the princess–who, though nearly as much frightened as her ladies, felt that she must set them a good example. "Wait till then, and he will tell us what to do."
So they waited, seated on the highest chairs they could find, wrapped in their warmest garments, and with piles of cushions under their feet, while the poor birds flew with numbed wings hither and thither, till they were so lucky as to discover an open window in some forgotten corner. Through this they vanished, and were seen no more.
At last, when the princess and her ladies had been forced to leave the upper rooms, where the walls and floors had melted away, and to take refuge in the hall, the young man came home. He had ridden back along a winding road from which he did not see the palace till he was close upon it, and stood horrified at the spectacle before him. He knew in an instant that his wife must have betrayed his trust, but he would not reproach her, as she must be suffering enough already. Hurrying on he sprang over all that was left of the palace walls, and the princess gave a cry of relief at the sight of him.
"Come quickly," he said, "or you will be frozen to death!" And a dreary little procession set out for the king's palace, the greyhound and the cat bringing up the rear.
At the gates he left them, though his wife besought him to allow her to enter.
"You have betrayed me and ruined me," he said sternly; "I go to seek my fortune alone." And without another word he turned and left her.
With his falcon on his wrist, and his greyhound and cat behind him, the young man walked a long way, inquiring of everyone he met whether they had seen his enemy the ogre. But nobody had. Then he bade his falcon fly up into the sky–up, up, and up–and try if his sharp eyes could discover the old thief. The bird had to go so high that he did not return for some hours; but he told his master that the ogre was lying asleep in a splendid palace in a far country on the shores of the sea. This was delightful news to the young man, who instantly bought some meat for the falcon, bidding him make a good meal.
"Tomorrow," said he, "you will fly to the palace where the ogre lies, and while he is asleep you will search all about him for a stone on which is engraved strange signs; this you will bring to me. In three days I shall expect you back here."
"Well, I must take the cat with me," answered the bird.
The sun had not yet risen before the falcon soared high into the air, the cat seated on his back, with his paws tightly clasping the bird's neck.
"You had better shut your eyes or you may get giddy," said the bird; and the cat, you had never before been off the ground except to climb a tree, did as she was bid.
All that day and all that night they flew, and in the morning they saw the ogre's palace lying beneath them.
"Dear me," said the cat, opening her eyes for the first time, "that looks to me very like a rat city down there, let us go down to it; they may be able to help us." So they alighted in some bushes in the heart of the rat city. The falcon remained where he was, but the cat lay down outside the principal gate, causing terrible excitement among the rats.
At length, seeing she did not move, one bolder than the rest put its head out of an upper window of the castle, and said, in a trembling voice:
"Why have you come here? What do you want? If it is anything in our power, tell us, and we will do it."
"If you would have let me speak to you before, I would have told you that I come as a friend," replied the cat; "and I shall be greatly obliged if you would send four of the strongest and cunningest among you, to do me a service."
"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered the rat, much relieved. "But if you will inform me what it is you wish them to do I shall be better able to judge who is most fitted for the post."
"I thank you," said the cat. "Well, what they have to do is this: To-night they must burrow under the walls of the castle and go up to the room were an ogre lies asleep. Somewhere about him he has hidden a stone, on which are engraved strange signs. When they have found it they must take it from him without his waking, and bring it to me."
"Your orders shall be obeyed," replied the rat. And he went out to give his instructions.
About midnight the cat, who was still sleeping before the gate, was awakened by some water flung at her by the head rat, who could not make up his mind to open the doors.
"Here is the stone you wanted," said he, when the cat started up with a loud mew; "if you will hold up your paws I will drop it down." And so he did. "And now farewell," continued the rat; "you have a long way to go, and will do well to start before daybreak."
"Your counsel is good," replied the cat, smiling to itself; and putting the stone in her mouth she went off to seek the falcon.
Now all this time neither the cat nor the falcon had had any food, and the falcon soon got tired carrying such a heavy burden. When night arrived he declared he could go no further, but would spend it on the banks of a river.
"And it is my turn to take care of the stone," said he, "or it will seem as if you had done everything and I nothing."
"No, I got it, and I will keep it," answered the cat, who was tired and cross; and they began a fine quarrel. But, unluckily, in the midst of it, the cat raised her voice, and the stone fell into the ear of a big fish which happened to be swimming by, and though both the cat and the falcon sprang into the water after it, they were too late.
Half drowned, and more than half choked, the two faithful servants scrambled back to land again. The falcon flew to a tree and spread his wings in the sun to dry, but the cat, after giving herself a good shake, began to scratch up the sandy banks and to throw the bits into the stream.
"What are you doing that for?" asked a little fish. "Do you know that you are making the water quite muddy?"
"That doesn"t matter at all to me," answered the cat. "I am going to fill up all the river, so that the fishes may die."
"That is very unkind, as we have never done you any harm," replied the fish. "Why are you so angry with us?"
"Because one of you has got a stone of mine– a stone with strange signs upon it–which dropped into the water. If you will promise to get it back for me, why, perhaps I will leave your river alone."
"I will certainly try," answered the fish in a great hurry; "but you must have a little patience, as it may not be an easy task." And in an instant his scales might be seen flashing quickly along.
The fish swam as fast as he could to the sea, which was not far distant, and calling together all his relations who lived in the neighbourhood, he told them of the terrible danger which threatened the dwellers in the river.
"None of us has got it," said the fishes, shaking their heads; "but in the bay yonder there is a tunny who, although he is so old, always goes everywhere. He will be able to tell you about it, if anyone can." So the little fish swam off to the tunny, and again related his story.
"Why I was up that river only a few hours ago!" cried the tunny; "and as I was coming back something fell into my ear, and there it is still, for I went to sleep, when I got home and forgot all about it. Perhaps it may be what you want." And stretching up his tail he whisked out the stone.
"Yes, I think that must be it," said the fish with joy. And taking the stone in his mouth he carried it to the place where the cat was waiting for him.
"I am much obliged to you," said the cat, as the fish laid the stone on the sand, "and to reward you, I will let your river alone." And she mounted the falcon's back, and they flew to their master.
Ah, how glad he was to see them again with the magic stone in their possession. In a moment he had wished for a palace, but this time it was of green marble; and then he wished for the princess and her ladies to occupy it. And there they lived for many years, and when the old king died the princess's husband reigned in his stead.

Once upon a time there lived a man whose name was Abu Nowas, and he was a great favourite with the Sultan of the country, who had a palace in the same town where Abu Nowas dwelt.
One day Abu Nowas came weeping into the hall of the palace where the Sultan was sitting, and said to him: "Oh, mighty Sultan, my wife is dead."
"That is bad news," replied the Sultan; "I must get you another wife." And he bade his Grand Vizir send for the Sultana.
"This poor Abu Nowas has lost his wife," said he, when she entered the hall.
"Oh, then we must get him another," answered the Sultana; "I have a girl that will suit him exactly," and clapped her hands loudly. At this signal a maiden appeared and stood before her.
"I have got a husband for you," said the Sultana.
"Who is he?" asked the girl.
"Abu Nowas, the jester," replied the Sultana.
"I will take him," answered the maiden; and as Abu Nowas made no objection, it was all arranged. The Sultana had the most beautiful clothes made for the bride, and the Sultan gave the bridegroom his wedding suit, and a thousand gold pieces into the bargain, and soft carpets for the house.
So Abu Nowas took his wife home, and for some time they were very happy, and spent the money freely which the Sultan had given them, never thinking what they should do for more when that was gone. But come to an end it did, and they had to sell their fine things one by one, till at length nothing was left but a cloak apiece, and one blanket to cover them. "We have run through our fortune," said Abu Nowas, "what are we to do now? I am afraid to go back to the Sultan, for he will command his servants to turn me from the door. But you shall return to your mistress, and throw yourself at her feet and weep, and perhaps she will help us."
"Oh, you had much better go," said the wife. "I shall not know what to say."
"Well, then, stay at home, if you like," answered Abu Nowas, "and I will ask to be admitted to the Sultan's presence, and will tell him, with sobs, that my wife is dead, and that I have no money for her burial. When he hears that perhaps he will give us something."
"Yes, that is a good plan," said the wife; and Abu Nowas set out.
The Sultan was sitting in the hall of justice when Abu Nowas entered, his eyes streaming with tears, for he had rubbed some pepper into them. They smarted dreadfully, and he could hardly see to walk straight, and everyone wondered what was the matter with him.
"Abu Nowas! What has happened?" cried the Sultan.
"Oh, noble Sultan, my wife is dead," wept he.
"We must all die," answered the Sultan; but this was not the reply for which Abu Nowas had hoped.
"True, O Sultan, but I have neither shroud to wrap her in, nor money to bury her with," went on Abu Nowas, in no wise abashed by the way the Sultan had received his news.
"Well, give him a hundred pieces of gold," said the Sultan, turning to the Grand Vizir. And when the money was counted out Abu Nowas bowed low, and left the hall, his tears still flowing, but with joy in his heart.
"Have you got anything?" cried his wife, who was waiting for him anxiously.
"Yes, a hundred gold pieces," said he, throwing down the bag, "but that will not last us any time. Now you must go to the Sultana, clothed in sackcloth and robes of mourning, and tell her that your husband, Abu Nowas, is dead, and you have no money for his burial. When she hears that, she will be sure to ask you what has become of the money and the fine clothes she gave us on our marriage, and you will answer, "before he died he sold everything.""
The wife did as she was told, and wrapping herself in sackcloth went up to the Sultana's own palace, and as she was known to have been one of Subida's favourite attendants, she was taken without difficulty into the private apartments.
"What is the matter?" inquired the Sultana, at the sight of the dismal figure.
"My husband lies dead at home, and he has spent all our money, and sold everything, and I have nothing left to bury him with," sobbed the wife.
Then Subida took up a purse containing two hundred gold pieces, and said: "Your husband served us long and faithfully. You must see that he has a fine funeral."
The wife took the money, and, kissing the feet of the Sultana, she joyfully hastened home. They spent some happy hours planning how they should spend it, and thinking how clever they had been. "When the Sultan goes this evening to Subida's palace," said Abu Nowas, 'she will be sure to tell him that Abu Nowas is dead. "Not Abu Nowas, it is his wife," he will reply, and they will quarrel over it, and all the time we shall be sitting here enjoying ourselves. Oh, if they only knew, how angry they would be!"
As Abu Nowas had foreseen, the Sultan went, in the evening after his business was over, to pay his usual visit to the Sultana.
"Poor Abu Nowas is dead!" said Subida when he entered the room.
"It is not Abu Nowas, but his wife who is dead," answered the Sultan.
"No; really you are quite wrong. She came to tell me herself only a couple of hours ago," replied Subida, "and as he had spent all their money, I gave her something to bury him with."
"You must be dreaming," exclaimed the Sultan. 'soon after midday Abu Nowas came into the hall, his eyes streaming with tears, and when I asked him the reason he answered that his wife was dead, and they had sold everything they had, and he had nothing left, not so much as would buy her a shroud, far less for her burial."
For a long time they talked, and neither would listen to the other, till the Sultan sent for the door-keeper and bade him go instantly to the house of Abu Nowas and see if it was the man or his wife who was dead. But Abu Nowas happened to be sitting with his wife behind the latticed window, which looked on the street, and he saw the man coming, and sprang up at once. "There is the Sultan's door-keeper! They have sent him here to find out the truth. Quick! throw yourself on the bed and pretend that you are dead." And in a moment the wife was stretched out stiffly, with a linen sheet spread across her, like a corpse.
She was only just in time, for the sheet was hardly drawn across her when the door opened and the porter came in. "Has anything happened?" asked he.
"My poor wife is dead," replied Abu Nowas. "Look! she is laid out here." And the porter approached the bed, which was in a corner of the room, and saw the stiff form lying underneath.
"We must all die," said he, and went back to the Sultan.
"Well, have you found out which of them is dead?" asked the Sultan.
"Yes, noble Sultan; it is the wife," replied the porter.
"He only says that to please you," cried Subida in a rage; and calling to her chamberlain, she ordered him to go at once to the dwelling of Abu Nowas and see which of the two was dead. "And be sure you tell the truth about it," added she, "or it will be the worse for you."
As her chamberlain drew near the house, Abu Nowas caught sight of him. "There is the Sultana's chamberlain," he exclaimed in a fright. "Now it is my turn to die. Be quick and spread the sheet over me." And he laid himself on the bed, and held his breath when the chamberlain came in. "What are you weeping for?" asked the man, finding the wife in tears.
"My husband is dead," answered she, pointing to the bed; and the chamberlain drew back the sheet and beheld Abu Nowas lying stiff and motionless. Then he gently replaced the sheet and returned to the palace.
"Well, have you found out this time?" asked the Sultan.
"My lord, it is the husband who is dead."
"But I tell you he was with me only a few hours ago," cried the Sultan angrily. "I must get to the bottom of this before I sleep! Let my golden coach be brought round at once."
The coach was before the door in another five minutes, and the Sultan and Sultana both got in. Abu Nowas had ceased being a dead man, and was looking into the street when he saw the coach coming. "Quick! quick!" he called to his wife. "The Sultan will be here directly, and we must both be dead to receive him." So they laid themselves down, and spread the sheet over them, and held their breath. At that instant the Sultan entered, followed by the Sultana and the chamberlain, and he went up to the bed and found the corpses stiff and motionless. "I would give a thousand gold pieces to anyone who would tell me the truth about this," cried he, and at the words Abu Nowas sat up. "Give them to me, then," said he, holding out his hand. "You cannot give them to anyone who needs them more."
"Oh, Abu Nowas, you impudent dog!" exclaimed the Sultan, bursting into a laugh, in which the Sultana joined. "I might have known it was one of your tricks!" But he sent Abu Nowas the gold he had promised, and let us hope that it did not fly so fast as the last had done.

Once there was a very poor man, named Haamdaa′nee, who begged from door to door for his living, sometimes taking things before they were offered him. After a while people became suspicious of him, and stopped giving him anything, in order to keep him away from their houses. So at last he was reduced to the necessity of going every morning to the village dust heap, and picking up and eating the few grains of the tiny little millet seed that he might find there.
One day, as he was scratching and turning over the heap, he found a dime, which he tied up in a corner of his ragged dress, and continued to hunt for millet grains, but could not find one.
"Oh, well," said he, "I"ve got a dime now; I"m pretty well fixed. I"ll go home and take a nap instead of a meal."
So he went to his hut, took a drink of water, put some tobacco in his mouth, and went to sleep.
The next morning, as he scratched in the dust heap, he saw a countryman going along, carrying a basket made of twigs, and he called to him: "Hi, there, countryman! What have you in that cage?"
The countryman, whose name was Moohaad′eem, replied, "Gazelles."
And Haamdaanee called: "Bring them here. Let me see them."
Now there were three well-to-do men standing near; and when they saw the countryman coming to Haamdaanee they smiled, and said, "You"re taking lots of trouble for nothing, Moohaadeem."
"How's that, gentlemen?" he inquired.
"Why," said they, "that poor fellow has nothing at all. Not a cent."
"Oh, I don"t know that," said the countryman; "he may have plenty, for all I know."
"Not he," said they.
"Don"t you see for yourself," continued one of them, "that he is on the dust heap? Every day he scratches there like a hen, trying to get enough grains of millet to keep himself alive. If he had any money, wouldn"t he buy a square meal, for once in his life? Do you think he would want to buy a gazelle? What would he do with it? He can"t find enough food for himself, without looking for any for a gazelle."
But Moohaadeem said: "Gentlemen, I have brought some goods here to sell. I answer all who call me, and if any one says "Come," I go to him. I don"t favor one and slight another; therefore, as this man called me, I"m going to him."
"All right," said the first man; "you don"t believe us. Well, we know where he lives, and all about him, and we know that he can"t buy anything."
"That's so," said the second man. "Perhaps, however, you will see that we were right, after you have a talk with him."
To which the third man added, "Clouds are a sign of rain, but we have seen no signs of his being about to spend any money."
"All right, gentlemen," said Moohaadeem; "many better-looking people than he call me, and when I show them my gazelles they say, "Oh, yes, they"re very beautiful, but awfully dear; take them away." So I shall not be disappointed if this man says the same thing. I shall go to him, anyhow."
Then one of the three men said, "Let us go with this man, and see what the beggar will buy."
"Pshaw!" said another; "buy! You talk foolishly. He has not had a good meal in three years, to my knowledge; and a man in his condition doesn"t have money to buy gazelles. However, let's go; and if he makes this poor countryman carry his load over there just for the fun of looking at the gazelles, let each of us give him a good hard whack with our walking-sticks, to teach him how to behave toward honest merchants."
So, when they came near him, one of those three men said: "Well, here are the gazelles; now buy one. Here they are, you old hypocrite; you"ll feast your eyes on them, but you can"t buy them."
But Haamdaanee, paying no attention to the men, said to Moohaadeem, "How much for one of your gazelles?"
Then another of those men broke in: "You"re very innocent, aren"t you? You know, as well as I do, that gazelles are sold every day at two for a quarter."
Still taking no notice of these outsiders, Haamdaanee continued, "I"d like to buy one for a dime."
"One for a dime!" laughed the men; "of course you"d like to buy one for a dime. Perhaps you"d also like to have the dime to buy with."
Then one of them gave him a push on the cheek.
At this Haamdaanee turned and said: "Why do you push me on the cheek, when I"ve done nothing to you? I do not know you. I call this man, to transact some business with him, and you, who are strangers, step in to spoil our trade."
He then untied the knot in the corner of his ragged coat, produced the dime, and, handing it to Moohaadeem, said, "Please, good man, let me have a gazelle for that."
At this, the countryman took a small gazelle out of the cage and handed it to him, saying, "Here, master, take this one. I call it Keejee′paa." Then turning to those three men, he laughed, and said: "Ehe! How's this? You, with your white robes, and turbans, and swords, and daggers, and sandals on your feet—you gentlemen of property, and no mistake—you told me this man was too poor to buy anything; yet he has bought a gazelle for a dime, while you fine fellows, I think, haven"t enough money among you to buy half a gazelle, if they were five cents each."
Then Moohaadeem and the three men went their several ways.
As for Haamdaanee, he stayed at the dust heap until he found a few grains of millet for himself and a few for Keejeepaa, the gazelle, and then went to his hut, spread his sleeping mat, and he and the gazelle slept together.
This going to the dust heap for a few grains of millet and then going home to bed continued for about a week.
Then one night Haamdaanee was awakened by some one calling, "Master!" Sitting up, he answered: "Here I am. Who calls?" The gazelle answered, "I do!"
Upon this, the beggar man became so scared that he did not know whether he should faint or get up and run away.
Seeing him so overcome, Keejeepaa asked, "Why, master, what's the matter?"
"Oh, gracious!" he gasped; "what a wonder I see!"
"A wonder?" said the gazelle, looking all around; "why, what is this wonder, that makes you act as if you were all broken up?"
"Why, it's so wonderful, I can hardly believe I"m awake!" said his master. "Who in the world ever before knew of a gazelle that could speak?"
"Oho!" laughed Keejeepaa; "is that all? There are many more wonderful things than that. But now, listen, while I tell you why I called you."
"Certainly; I"ll listen to every word," said the man. "I can"t help listening!"
"Well, you see, it's just this way," said Keejeepaa; "I"ve allowed you to become my master, and I can not run away from you; so I want you to make an agreement with me, and I will make you a promise, and keep it."
"Say on," said his master.
"Now," continued the gazelle, "one doesn"t have to be acquainted with you long, in order to discover that you are very poor. This scratching a few grains of millet from the dust heap every day, and managing to subsist upon them, is all very well for you—you"re used to it, because it's a matter of necessity with you; but if I keep it up much longer, you won"t have any gazelle—Keejeepaa will die of starvation. Therefore, I want to go away every day and feed on my own kind of food; and I promise you I will return every evening."
"Well, I guess I"ll have to give my consent," said the man, in no very cheerful tone.
As it was now dawn, Keejeepaa jumped up and ran out of the door, Haamdaanee following him. The gazelle ran very fast, and his master stood watching him until he disappeared. Then tears started in the man's eyes, and, raising his hands, he cried, "Oh, my mother!" Then he cried, "Oh, my father!" Then he cried, "Oh, my gazelle! It has run away!"
Some of his neighbors, who heard him carrying on in this manner, took the opportunity to inform him that he was a fool, an idiot, and a dissipated fellow.
Said one of them: "You hung around that dust heap, goodness knows how long, scratching like a hen, till fortune gave you a dime. You hadn"t sense enough to go and buy some decent food; you had to buy a gazelle. Now you"ve let the creature run away. What are you crying about? You brought all your trouble on yourself."
All this, of course, was very comforting to Haamdaanee, who slunk off to the dust heap, got a few grains of millet, and came back to his hut, which now seemed meaner and more desolate than ever.
At sunset, however, Keejeepaa came trotting in; and the beggar was happy again, and said, "Ah, my friend, you have returned to me."
"Of course," said the gazelle; "didn"t I promise you? You see, I feel that when you bought me you gave all the money you had in the world, even though it was only a dime. Why, then, should I grieve you? I couldn"t do it. If I go and get myself some food, I"ll always come back evenings."
When the neighbors saw the gazelle come home every evening and run off every morning, they were greatly surprised, and began to suspect that Haamdaanee was a wizard.
Well, this coming and going continued for five days, the gazelle telling its master each night what fine places it had been to, and what lots of food it had eaten.
On the sixth day it was feeding among some thorn bushes in a thick wood, when, scratching away some bitter grass at the foot of a big tree, it saw an immense diamond of intense brightness.
"Oho!" said Keejeepaa, in great astonishment; "here's property, and no mistake! This is worth a kingdom! If I take it to my master he will be killed; for, being a poor man, if they say to him, "Where did you get it?" and he answers, "I picked it up," they will not believe him; if he says, "It was given to me," they will not believe him either. It will not do for me to get my master into difficulties. I know what I"ll do. I"ll seek some powerful person; he will use it properly."
So Keejeepaa started off through the forest, holding the diamond in his mouth, and ran, and ran, but saw no town that day; so he slept in the forest, and arose at dawn and pursued his way. And the second day passed like the first.
On the third day the gazelle had traveled from dawn until between eight and nine o"clock, when he began to see scattered houses, getting larger in size, and knew he was approaching a town. In due time he found himself in the main street of a large city, leading direct to the sultan's palace, and began to run as fast as he could. People passing along stopped to look at the strange sight of a gazelle running swiftly along the main street with something wrapped in green leaves between its teeth.
The sultan was sitting at the door of his palace, when Keejeepaa, stopping a little way off, dropped the diamond from its mouth, and, lying down beside it, panting, called out: "Ho, there! Ho, there!" which is a cry every one makes in that part of the world when wishing to enter a house, remaining outside until the cry is answered.
After the cry had been repeated several times, the sultan said to his attendants, "Who is doing all that calling?"
And one answered, "Master, it's a gazelle that's calling, "Ho, there!""
"Ho-ho!" said the sultan; "Ho-ho! Invite the gazelle to come near."
Then three attendants ran to Keejeepaa and said: "Come, get up. The sultan commands you to come near."
So the gazelle arose, picked up the diamond, and, approaching the sultan, laid the jewel at his feet, saying, "Master, good afternoon!" To which the sultan replied: "May God make it good! Come near."
The sultan ordered his attendants to bring a carpet and a large cushion, and desired the gazelle to rest upon them. When it protested that it was comfortable as it was, he insisted, and Keejeepaa had to allow himself to be made a very honored guest. Then they brought milk and rice, and the sultan would hear nothing until the gazelle had fed and rested.
At last, when everything had been disposed of, the sultan said, "Well, now, my friend, tell me what news you bring."
And Keejeepaa said: "Master, I don"t exactly know how you will like the news I bring. The fact is, I"m sent here to insult you! I"ve come to try and pick a quarrel with you! In fact, I"m here to propose a family alliance with you!"
At this the sultan exclaimed: "Oh, come! for a gazelle, you certainly know how to talk! Now, the fact of it is, I"m looking for some one to insult me. I"m just aching to have some one pick a quarrel with me. I"m impatient for a family alliance. Go on with your message."
Then Keejeepaa said, "You don"t bear any ill will against me, who am only a messenger?"
And the sultan said, "None at all."
"Well," said Keejeepaa, "look at this pledge I bring;" dropping the diamond wrapped in leaves into the sultan's lap.
When the sultan opened the leaves and saw the great, sparkling jewel, he was overcome with astonishment. At last he said, "Well?"
"I have brought this pledge," said the gazelle, "from my master, Sultan Daaraa′ee. He has heard that you have a daughter, so he sent you this jewel, hoping you will forgive him for not sending something more worthy of your acceptance than this trifle."
"Goodness!" said the sultan to himself; "he calls this a trifle!" Then to the gazelle: "Oh, that's all right; that's all right. I"m satisfied. The Sultan Daaraaee has my consent to marry my daughter, and I don"t want a single thing from him. Let him come empty-handed. If he has more of these trifles, let him leave them at home. This is my message, and I hope you will make it perfectly clear to your master."
The gazelle assured him that he would explain everything satisfactorily, adding: "And now, master, I take my leave. I go straight to our own town, and hope that in about eleven days we shall return to be your guests." So, with mutual compliments, they parted.
In the meantime, Haamdaanee was having an exceedingly tough time. Keejeepaa having disappeared, he wandered about the town moaning, "Oh, my poor gazelle! my poor gazelle!" while the neighbors laughed and jeered at him, until, between them and his loss, he was nearly out of his mind.
But one evening, when he had gone to bed, Keejeepaa walked in. Up he jumped, and began to embrace the gazelle, and weep over it, and carry on at a great rate.
When he thought there had been about enough of this kind of thing, the gazelle said: "Come, come; keep quiet, my master. I"ve brought you good news." But the beggar man continued to cry and fondle, and declare that he had thought his gazelle was dead.
At last Keejeepaa said: "Oh, well, master, you see I"m all right. You must brace up, and prepare to hear my news, and do as I advise you."
"Go on; go on," replied his master; "explain what you will, I"ll do whatever you require me to do. If you were to say, "Lie down on your back, that I may roll you over the side of the hill," I would lie down."
"Well," said the gazelle, "there is not much to explain just now, but I"ll tell you this: I"ve seen many kinds of food, food that is desirable and food that is objectionable, but this food I"m about to offer you is very sweet indeed."
"What?" said Haamdaanee. "Is it possible that in this world there is anything that is positively good? There must be good and bad in everything. Food that is both sweet and bitter is good food, but if food were nothing but sweetness would it not be injurious?"
"H"m!" yawned the gazelle; "I"m too tired to talk philosophy. Let's go to sleep now, and when I call you in the morning, all you have to do is to get up and follow me."
So at dawn they set forth, the gazelle leading the way, and for five days they journeyed through the forest.
On the fifth day they came to a stream, and Keejeepaa said to his master, "Lie down here." When he had done so, the gazelle set to and beat him so soundly that he cried out: "Oh, let up, I beg of you!"
"Now," said the gazelle, "I"m going away, and when I return I expect to find you right here; so don"t you leave this spot on any account." Then he ran away, and about ten o"clock that morning he arrived at the house of the sultan.
Now, ever since the day Keejeepaa left the town, soldiers had been placed along the road to watch for and announce the approach of Sultan Daaraaee; so one of them, when he saw the gazelle in the distance, rushed up and cried to the sultan, "Sultan Daaraaee is coming! I"ve seen the gazelle running as fast as it can in this direction."
The sultan and his attendants immediately set out to meet his guests; but when they had gone a little way beyond the town they met the gazelle coming along alone, who, on reaching the sultan, said, "Good day, my master." The sultan replied in kind, and asked the news, but Keejeepaa said: "Ah, do not ask me. I can scarcely walk, and my news is bad!"
"Why, how is that?" asked the sultan.
"Oh, dear!" sighed the gazelle; "such misfortune and misery! You see, Sultan Daaraaee and I started alone to come here, and we got along all right until we came to the thick part of the forest yonder, when we were met by robbers, who seized my master, bound him, beat him, and took everything he had, even stripping off every stitch of his clothing. Oh, dear! oh, dear!"
"Dear me!" said the sultan; "we must attend to this at once." So, hurrying back with his attendants to his house, he called a groom, to whom he said, "Saddle the best horse in my stable, and put on him my finest harness." Then he directed a woman servant to open the big inlaid chest and bring him a bag of clothes. When she brought it he picked out a loin-cloth, and a long white robe, and a black overjacket, and a shawl for the waist, and a turban cloth, all of the very finest. Then he sent for a curved sword with a gold hilt, and a curved dagger with gold filigree, and a pair of elegant sandals, and a fine walking-cane.
Then the sultan said to Keejeepaa, "Take some of my soldiers, and let them convey these things to Sultan Daaraaee, that he may dress himself and come to me."
But the gazelle answered: "Ah, my master, can I take these soldiers with me and put Sultan Daaraaee to shame? There he lies, beaten and robbed, and I would not have any one see him. I can take everything by myself."
"Why," exclaimed the sultan, "here is a horse, and there are clothes and arms. I don"t see how a little gazelle can manage all those things."
But the gazelle had them fasten everything on the horse's back, and tie the end of the bridle around his own neck, and then he set off alone, amidst the wonder and admiration of the people of that city, high and low.
When he arrived at the place where he had left the beggar-man, he found him lying waiting for him, and overjoyed at his return.
"Now," said he, "I have brought you the sweet food I promised. Come, get up and bathe yourself."
With the hesitation of a person long unaccustomed to such a thing, the man stepped into the stream and began to wet himself a little.
"Oh," said the gazelle, impatiently, "a little water like that won"t do you much good; get out into the deep pool."
"Dear me!" said the man, timidly; "there is so much water there; and where there is much water there are sure to be horrible animals."
"Animals! What kind of animals?"
"Well, crocodiles, water lizards, snakes, and, at any rate, frogs; and they bite people, and I"m terribly afraid of all of them."
"Oh, well," said Keejeepaa, "do the best you can in the stream; but rub yourself well with earth, and, for goodness" sake, scrub your teeth well with sand; they are awfully dirty."
So the man obeyed, and soon made quite a change in his appearance.
Then the gazelle said: "Here, hurry up and put on these things. The sun has gone down, and we ought to have started before this."
So the man dressed himself in the fine clothes the sultan had sent, and then he mounted the horse, and they started; the gazelle trotting on ahead.
When they had gone some distance, the gazelle stopped, and said, "See here: nobody who sees you now would suspect that you are the man who scratched in the dust heap yesterday. Even if we were to go back to our town the neighbors would not recognize you, if it were only for the fact that your face is clean and your teeth are white. Your appearance is all right, but I have a caution to give you. Over there, where we are going, I have procured for you the sultan's daughter for a wife, with all the usual wedding gifts. Now, you must keep quiet. Say nothing except, "How d"ye do?" and "What's the news?" Let me do the talking."
"All right," said the man; "that suits me exactly."
"Do you know what your name is?"
"Of course I do."
"Indeed? Well, what is it?"
"Why, my name is Haamdaanee."
"Not much," laughed Keejeepaa; "your name is Sultan Daaraaee."
"Oh, is it?" said his master. "That's good."
So they started forward again, and in a little while they saw soldiers running in every direction, and fourteen of these joined them to escort them. Then they saw ahead of them the sultan, and the vizirs, and the emirs, and the judges, and the great men of the city, coming to meet them.
"Now, then," said Keejeepaa, "get off your horse and salute your father-in-law. That's him in the middle, wearing the sky-blue jacket."
"All right," said the man, jumping off his horse, which was then led by a soldier.
So the two met, and the sultans shook hands, and kissed each other, and walked up to the palace together.
Then they had a great feast, and made merry and talked until night, at which time Sultan Daaraaee and the gazelle were put into an inner room, with three soldiers at the door to guard and attend upon them.
When the morning came, Keejeepaa went to the sultan and said: "Master, we wish to attend to the business which brought us here. We want to marry your daughter, and the sooner the ceremony takes place, the better it will please the Sultan Daaraaee."
"Why, that's all right," said the sultan; "the bride is ready. Let some one call the teacher, Mwaalee′moo, and tell him to come at once."
When Mwaaleemoo arrived, the sultan said, "See here, we want you to marry this gentleman to my daughter right away."
"All right; I"m ready," said the teacher. So they were married.
Early the next morning the gazelle said to his master: "Now I"m off on a journey. I shall be gone about a week; but however long I am gone, don"t you leave the house till I return. Good-bye."
Then he went to the real sultan and said: "Good master, Sultan Daaraaee has ordered me to return to our town and put his house in order; he commands me to be here again in a week; if I do not return by that time, he will stay here until I come."
The sultan asked him if he would not like to have some soldiers go with him; but the gazelle replied that he was quite competent to take care of himself, as his previous journeys had proved, and he preferred to go alone; so with mutual good wishes they parted.
But Keejeepaa did not go in the direction of the old village. He struck off by another road through the forest, and after a time came to a very fine town, of large, handsome houses. As he went through the principal street, right to the far end, he was greatly astonished to observe that the town seemed to have no inhabitants, for he saw neither man, woman, nor child in all the place.
At the end of the main street he came upon the largest and most beautiful house he had ever seen, built of sapphire, and turquoise, and costly marbles.
"Oh, my!" said the gazelle; "this house would just suit my master. I"ll have to pluck up my courage and see whether this is deserted like the other houses in this mysterious town."
So Keejeepaa knocked at the door, and called, "Hullo, there!" several times; but no one answered. And he said to himself: "This is strange! If there were no one inside, the door would be fastened on the outside. Perhaps they are in another part of the house, or asleep. I"ll call again, louder."
So he called again, very loud and long, "Hul-lo, th-e-re! Hul-lo!" And directly an old woman inside answered, "Who is that calling so loudly?"
"It is I, your grandchild, good mistress," said Keejeepaa.
"If you are my grandchild," replied the old woman, "go back to your home at once; don"t come and die here, and bring me to my death also."
"Oh, come," said he, "open the door, mistress; I have just a few words I wish to say to you."
"My dear grandson," she replied, "the only reason why I do not open the door is because I fear to endanger both your life and my own."
"Oh, don"t worry about that; I guess your life and mine are safe enough for a while. Open the door, anyhow, and hear the little I have to say."
So the old woman opened the door.
Then they exchanged salutations and compliments, after which she asked the gazelle, "What's the news from your place, grandson?"
"Oh, everything is going along pretty well," said he; "what's the news around here?"
"Ah!" sighed the old creature; "the news here is very bad. If you"re looking for a place to die in, you"ve struck it here. I"ve not the slightest doubt you"ll see all you want of death this very day."
"Huh!" replied Keejeepaa, lightly; "for a fly to die in honey is not bad for the fly, and doesn"t injure the honey."
"It may be all very well for you to be easy about it," persisted the old person; "but if people with swords and shields did not escape, how can a little thing like you avoid danger? I must again beg of you to go back to the place you came from. Your safety seems of more interest to me than it is to you."
"Well, you see, I can"t go back just now; and besides, I want to find out more about this place. Who owns it?"
"Ah, grandson, in this house are enormous wealth, numbers of people, hundreds of horses, and the owner is Neeo′ka Mkoo′, the wonderfully big snake. He owns this whole town, also."
"Oho! Is that so?" said Keejeepaa. "Look here, old lady; can"t you put me on to some plan of getting near this big snake, that I may kill him?"
"Mercy!" cried the old woman, in affright; "don"t talk like that. You"ve put my life in danger already, for I"m sure Neeoka Mkoo can hear what is said in this house, wherever he is. You see I"m a poor old woman, and I have been placed here, with those pots and pans, to cook for him. Well, when the big snake is coming, the wind begins to blow and the dust flies as it would do in a great storm. Then, when he arrives in the courtyard, he eats until he is full, and after that, goes inside there to drink water. When he has finished, he goes away again. This occurs every other day, just when the sun is overhead. I may add that Neeoka Mkoo has seven heads. Now, then, do you think yourself a match for him?"
"Look here, mother," said the gazelle, "don"t you worry about me. Has this big snake a sword?"
"He has. This is it," said she, taking from its peg a very keen and beautiful blade, and handing it to him; "but what's the use in bothering about it? We are dead already."
"We shall see about that," said Keejeepaa.
Just at that moment the wind began to blow, and the dust to fly, as if a great storm were approaching.
"Do you hear the great one coming?" cried the old woman.
"Pshaw!" said the gazelle; "I"m a great one also—and I have the advantage of being on the inside. Two bulls can"t live in one cattle-pen. Either he will live in this house, or I will."
Notwithstanding the terror the old lady was in, she had to smile at the assurance of this little undersized gazelle, and repeated over again her account of the people with swords and shields who had been killed by the big snake.
"Ah, stop your gabbling!" said the gazelle; "you can"t always judge a banana by its color or size. Wait and see, grandma."
In a very little while the big snake, Neeoka Mkoo, came into the courtyard, and went around to all the pots and ate their contents. Then he came to the door.
"Hullo, old lady," said he; "how is it I smell a new kind of odor inside there?"
"Oh, that's nothing, good master," replied the old woman; "I"ve been so busy around here lately I haven"t had time to look after myself; but this morning I used some perfume, and that's what you smell."
Now, Keejeepaa had drawn the sword, and was standing just inside the doorway; so, when the big snake put his head in, it was cut off so quickly that its owner did not know it was gone. When he put in his second head it was cut off with the same quickness; and, feeling a little irritation, he exclaimed, "Who's inside there, scratching me?" He then thrust in his third head, and that was cut off also.
This continued until six heads had been disposed of, when Neeoka Mkoo unfolded his rings and lashed around so that the gazelle and the old woman could not see one another through the dust.
Then the snake thrust in his seventh head, and the gazelle, crying: "Now your time has come; you"ve climbed many trees, but this you can not climb," severed it, and immediately fell down in a fainting fit.
Well, that old woman, although she was seventy-five years of age, jumped, and shouted, and laughed, like a girl of nine. Then she ran and got water, and sprinkled the gazelle, and turned him this way and that way, until at last he sneezed; which greatly pleased the old person, who fanned him and tended him until he was quite recovered.
"Oh, my!" said she; "who would have thought you could be a match for him, my grandson?"
"Well, well," said Keejeepaa; "that's all over. Now show me everything around this place."
So she showed him everything, from top to bottom: store-rooms full of goods, chambers full of expensive foods, rooms containing handsome people who had been kept prisoners for a long time, slaves, and everything.
Next he asked her if there was any person who was likely to lay claim to the place or make any trouble; and she answered: "No one; everything here belongs to you."
"Very well, then," said he, "you stay here and take care of these things until I bring my master. This place belongs to him now."
Keejeepaa stayed three days examining the house, and said to himself: "Well, when my master comes here he will be much pleased with what I have done for him, and he"ll appreciate it after the life he's been accustomed to. As to his father-in-law, there is not a house in his town that can compare with this."
On the fourth day he departed, and in due time arrived at the town where the sultan and his master lived. Then there were great rejoicings; the sultan being particularly pleased at his return, while his master felt as if he had received a new lease of life.
After everything had settled down a little, Keejeepaa told his master he must be ready to go, with his wife, to his new home after four days. Then he went and told the sultan that Sultan Daaraaee desired to take his wife to his own town in four days; to which the sultan strongly objected; but the gazelle said it was his master's wish, and at last everything was arranged.
On the day of the departure a great company assembled to escort Sultan Daaraaee and his bride. There were the bride's ladies-in-waiting, and slaves, and horsemen, and Keejeepaa leading them all.
So they traveled three days, resting when the sun was overhead, and stopping each evening about five o"clock to eat and sleep; arising next morning at day-break, eating, and going forward again. And all this time the gazelle took very little rest, going all through the company, from the ladies to the slaves, and seeing that every one was well supplied with food and quite comfortable; therefore the entire company loved him and valued him like the apples of their eyes.
On the fourth day, during the afternoon, many houses came into view, and some of the folks called Keejeepaa's attention to them. "Certainly," said he; "that is our town, and that house you see yonder is the palace of Sultan Daaraaee."
So they went on, and all the company filed into the courtyard, while the gazelle and his master went into the house.
When the old woman saw Keejeepaa, she began to dance, and shout, and carry on, just as she did when he killed Neeoka Mkoo, and taking up his foot she kissed it; but Keejeepaa said: "Old lady, let me alone; the one to be made much of is this my master, Sultan Daaraaee. Kiss his feet; he has the first honors whenever he is present."
The old woman excused herself for not knowing the master, and then Sultan Daaraaee and the gazelle went around on a tour of inspection. The sultan ordered all the prisoners to be released, the horses to be sent out to pasture, all the rooms to be swept, the furniture to be dusted, and, in the meantime, servants were busy preparing food. Then every one had apartments assigned to him, and all were satisfied.
After they had remained there some time, the ladies who had accompanied the bride expressed a desire to return to their own homes. Keejeepaa begged them not to hurry away, but after a while they departed, each loaded with gifts by the gazelle, for whom they had a thousand times more affection than for his master. Then things settled down to their regular routine.
One day the gazelle said to the old woman: "I think the conduct of my master is very singular. I have done nothing but good for him all the time I have been with him. I came to this town and braved many dangers for him, and when all was over I gave everything to him. Yet he has never asked: "How did you get this house? How did you get this town? Who is the owner of this house? Have you rented all these things, or have they been given you? What has become of the inhabitants of the place?" I don"t understand him. And further: although I have done nothing but good for him, he has never done one good thing for me. Nothing here is really his. He never saw such a house or town as this since the day he was born, and he doesn"t own anything of it. I believe the old folks were right when they said, "If you want to do any person good, don"t do too much; do him a little harm occasionally, and he"ll think more of you." However, I"ve done all I can now, and I"d like to see him make some little return."
Next morning the old woman was awakened early by the gazelle calling, "Mother! Mother!" When she went to him she found he was sick in his stomach, feverish, and all his legs ached.
"Go," said he, "and tell my master I am very ill."
So she went upstairs and found the master and mistress sitting on a marble couch, covered with a striped silk scarf from India.
"Well," said the master, "what do you want, old woman?"
"Oh, my master," cried she, "Keejeepaa is sick!"
The mistress started and said: "Dear me! What is the matter with him?"
"All his body pains him. He is sick all over."
"Oh, well," said the master, "what can I do? Go and get some of that red millet, that is too common for our use, and make him some gruel."
"Gracious!" exclaimed his wife, staring at him in amazement; "do you wish her to feed our friend with stuff that a horse would not eat if he were ever so hungry? This is not right of you."
"Ah, get out!" said he, "you"re crazy. We eat rice; isn"t red millet good enough for a gazelle that cost only a dime?"
"Oh, but he is no ordinary gazelle. He should be as dear to you as the apple of your eye. If sand got in your eye it would trouble you."
"You talk too much," returned her husband; then, turning to the old woman, he said, "Go and do as I told you."
So the old woman went downstairs, and when she saw the gazelle, she began to cry, and say, "Oh, dear! oh, dear!"
It was a long while before the gazelle could persuade her to tell him what had passed upstairs, but at last she told him all. When he had heard it, he said: "Did he really tell you to make me red millet gruel?"
"Ah," cried she, "do you think I would say such a thing if it were not so?"
"Well," said Keejeepaa, "I believe what the old folks said was right. However, we"ll give him another chance. Go up to him again, and tell him I am very sick, and that I can"t eat that gruel."
So she went upstairs, and found the master and mistress sitting by the window, drinking coffee.
The master, looking around and seeing her, said: "What's the matter now, old woman?"
And she said: "Master, I am sent by Keejeepaa. He is very sick indeed, and has not taken the gruel you told me to make for him."
"Oh, bother!" he exclaimed. "Hold your tongue, and keep your feet still, and shut your eyes, and stop your ears with wax; then, if that gazelle tells you to come up here, say that your legs are stiff; and if he tells you to listen, say your ears are deaf; and if he tells you to look, say your sight has failed you; and if he wants you to talk, tell him your tongue is paralyzed."
When the old woman heard these words, she stood and stared, and was unable to move. As for his wife, her face became sad, and the tears began to start from her eyes; observing which, her husband said, sharply, "What's the matter with you, sultan's daughter?"
The lady replied, "A man's madness is his undoing."
"Why do you say that, mistress?" he inquired.
"Ah," said she, "I am grieved, my husband, at your treatment of Keejeepaa. Whenever I say a good word for the gazelle you dislike to hear it. I pity you that your understanding is gone."
"What do you mean by talking in that manner to me?" he blustered.
"Why, advice is a blessing, if properly taken. A husband should advise with his wife, and a wife with her husband; then they are both blessed."
"Oh, stop," said her husband, impatiently; "it's evident you"ve lost your senses. You should be chained up." Then he said to the old woman: "Never mind her talk; and as to this gazelle, tell him to stop bothering me and putting on style, as if he were the sultan. I can"t eat, I can"t drink, I can"t sleep, because of that gazelle worrying me with his messages. First, the gazelle is sick; then, the gazelle doesn"t like what he gets to eat. Confound it! If he likes to eat, let him eat; if he doesn"t like to eat, let him die and be out of the way. My mother is dead, and my father is dead, and I still live and eat; shall I be put out of my way by a gazelle, that I bought for a dime, telling me he wants this thing or that thing? Go and tell him to learn how to behave himself toward his superiors."
When the old woman went downstairs, she found the gazelle was bleeding at the mouth, and in a very bad way. All she could say was, "My son, the good you did is all lost; but be patient."
And the gazelle wept with the old woman when she told him all that had passed, and he said, "Mother, I am dying, not only from sickness, but from shame and anger at this man's ingratitude."
After a while Keejeepaa told the old woman to go and tell the master that he believed he was dying. When she went upstairs she found Daaraaee chewing sugar-cane, and she said to him, "Master, the gazelle is worse; we think him nearer to dying than getting well."
To which he answered: "Haven"t I told you often enough not to bother me?"
Then his wife said: "Oh, husband, won"t you go down and see the poor gazelle? If you don"t like to go, let me go and see him. He never gets a single good thing from you."
But he turned to the old woman and said, "Go and tell that nuisance of a gazelle to die eleven times if he chooses to."
"Now, husband," persisted the lady, "what has Keejeepaa done to you? Has he done you any wrong? Such words as yours people use to their enemies only. Surely the gazelle is not your enemy. All the people who know him, great and lowly, love him dearly, and they will think it very wrong of you if you neglect him. Now, do be kind to him, Sultan Daaraaee."
But he only repeated his assertion that she had lost her wits, and would have nothing further of argument.
So the old woman went down and found the gazelle worse than ever.
In the meantime Sultan Daaraaee's wife managed to give some rice to a servant to cook for the gazelle, and also sent him a soft shawl to cover him and a pillow to lie upon. She also sent him a message that if he wished, she would have her father's best physicians attend him.
All this was too late, however, for just as these good things arrived, Keejeepaa died.
When the people heard he was dead, they went running around crying and having an awful time; and when Sultan Daaraaee found out what all the commotion was about he was very indignant, remarking, "Why, you are making as much fuss as if I were dead, and all over a gazelle that I bought for a dime!"
But his wife said: "Husband, it was this gazelle that came to ask me of my father, it was he who brought me from my father's, and it was to him I was given by my father. He gave you everything good, and you do not possess a thing that he did not procure for you. He did everything he could to help you, and you not only returned him unkindness, but now he is dead you have ordered people to throw him into the well. Let us alone, that we may weep."
But the gazelle was taken and thrown into the well.
Then the lady wrote a letter telling her father to come to her directly, and despatched it by trusty messengers; upon the receipt of which the sultan and his attendants started hurriedly to visit his daughter.
When they arrived, and heard that the gazelle was dead and had been thrown into the well, they wept very much; and the sultan, and the vizir, and the judges, and the rich chief men, all went down into the well and brought up the body of Keejeepaa, and took it away with them and buried it.
Now, that night the lady dreamt that she was at home at her father's house; and when dawn came she awoke and found she was in her own bed in her own town again.
And her husband dreamed that he was on the dust heap, scratching; and when he awoke there he was, with both hands full of dust, looking for grains of millet. Staring wildly he looked around to the right and left, saying: "Oh, who has played this trick on me? How did I get back here, I wonder?"
Just then the children going along, and seeing him, laughed and hooted at him, calling out: "Hullo, Haamdaanee, where have you been? Where do you come from? We thought you were dead long ago."
So the sultan's daughter lived in happiness with her people until the end, and that beggar-man continued to scratch for grains of millet in the dust heap until he died.
If this story is good, the goodness belongs to all; if it is bad, the badness belongs only to him who told it.

A long time ago a little town made up of a collection of low huts stood in a tiny green valley at the foot of a cliff. Of course the people had taken great care to build their houses out of reach of the highest tide which might be driven on shore by a west wind, but on the very edge of the town there had sprung up a tree so large that half its boughs hung over the huts and the other half over the deep sea right under the cliff, where sharks loved to come and splash in the clear water. The branches of the tree itself were laden with fruit, and every day at sunrise a big grey monkey might have been seen sitting in the topmost branches having his breakfast, and chattering to himself with delight.
After he had eaten all the fruit on the town side of the tree the monkey swung himself along the branches to the part which hung over the water. While he was looking out for a nice shady place where he might perch comfortably he noticed a shark watching him from below with greedy eyes.
"Can I do anything for you, my friend?" asked the monkey politely.
"Oh! if you only would thrown me down some of those delicious things, I should be so grateful," answered the shark. "After you have lived on fish for fifty years you begin to feel you would like a change. And I am so very, very tired of the taste of salt."
"Well, I don"t like salt myself," said the monkey; 'so if you will open your mouth I will throw this beautiful juicy kuyu into it," and, as he spoke, he pulled one off the branch just over his head. But it was not so easy to hit the shark's mouth as he supposed, even when the creature had turned on his back, and the first kuyu only struck one of his teeth and rolled into the water. However, the second time the monkey had better luck, and the fruit fell right in.
"Ah, how good!" cried the shark. 'send me another, please." And the monkey grew tired of picking the kuyu long before the shark was tired of eating them.
"It is getting late, and I must be going home to my children," he said, at length, "but if you are here at the same time to-morrow I will give you another treat."
"Thank you, thank you," said the shark, showing all his great ugly teeth as he grinned with delight; "you can"t guess how happy you have made me," and he swam away into the shadow, hoping to sleep away the time till the monkey came again.
For weeks the monkey and the shark breakfasted together, and it was a wonder that the tree had any fruit left for them. They became fast friends, and told each other about their homes and their children, and how to teach them all they ought to know. By and bye the monkey became rather discontented with his green house in a grove of palms beyond the town, and longed to see the strange things under the sea which he had heard of from the shark. The shark perceived this very clearly, and described greater marvels, and the monkey as he listened grew more and more gloomy.
Matters were in this state when one day the shark said: "I really hardly know how to thank you for all your kindness to me during these weeks. Here I have nothing of my own to offer you, but if you would only consent to come home with me, how gladly would I give you anything that might happen to take your fancy."
"I should like nothing better," cried the monkey, his teeth chattering, as they always did when he was pleased. "But how could I get there? Not by water. Ugh! It makes me ill to think of it!"
"Oh! don"t let that trouble you," replied the shark, "you have only to sit on my back and I will undertake that not a drop of water shall touch you."
So it was arranged, and directly after breakfast next morning the shark swam close up under the tree and the monkey dropped neatly on his back, without even a splash. After a few minutes–for at first he felt a little frightened at his strange position–the monkey began to enjoy himself vastly, and asked the shark a thousand questions about the fish and the sea-weeds and the oddly-shaped things that floated past them, and as the shark always gave him some sort of answer, the monkey never guessed that many of the objects they saw were as new to his guide as to himself.
The sun had risen and set six times when the shark suddenly said, "My friend, we have now performed half our journey, and it is time that I should tell you something."
"What is it?" asked the monkey. "Nothing unpleasant, I hope, for you sound rather grave?"
"Oh, no! Nothing at all. It is only that shortly before we left I heard that the sultan of my country is very ill, and that the only thing to cure him is a monkey's heart."
"Poor man, I am very sorry for him," replied the monkey; "but you were unwise not to tell me till we had started."
"What do you mean?" asked the shark; but the monkey, who now understood the whole plot, did not answer at once, for he was considering what he should say.
"Why are you so silent?" inquired the shark again.
"I was thinking what a pity it was you did not tell me while I was still on land, and then I would have brought my heart with me."
"Your heart! Why isn"t your heart here?" said the shark, with a puzzled expression.
"Oh, no! Of course not. Is it possible you don"t know that when we leave home we always hang up our hearts on trees, to prevent their being troublesome? However, perhaps you won"t believe that, and will just think I have invented it because I am afraid, so let us go on to your country as fast as we can, and when we arrive you can look for my heart, and if you find it you can kill me."
The monkey spoke in such a calm, indifferent way that the shark was quite deceived, and began to wish he had not been in such a hurry.
"But there is no use going on if your heart is not with you," he said at last. "We had better turn back to the town, and then you can fetch it."
Of course, this was just what the monkey wanted, but he was careful not to seem too pleased.
"Well, I don"t know," he remarked carelessly, "it is such a long way; but you may be right."
"I am sure I am," answered the shark, "and I will swim as quickly as I can," and so he did, and in three days they caught sight of the kuyu tree hanging over the water.
With a sigh of relief the monkey caught hold of the nearest branch and swung himself up.
"Wait for me here," he called out to the shark. "I am so hungry I must have a little breakfast, and then I will go and look for my heart," and he went further and further into the branches so that the shark could not see him. Then he curled himself up and went to sleep.
"Are you there?" cried the shark, who was soon tired of swimming about under the cliff, and was in haste to be gone.
The monkey awoke with a start, but did not answer.
"Are you there?" called the shark again, louder than before, and in a very cross voice.
"Oh, yes. I am here," replied the monkey; "but I wish you had not wakened me up. I was having such a nice nap."
"Have you got it?" asked the shark. "It is time we were going."
"Going where?" inquired the monkey.
"Why, to my country, of course, with your heart. You CAN"T have forgotten!"
"My dear friend," answered the monkey, with a chuckle, "I think you must be going a little mad. Do you take me for a washerman's donkey?"
"Don"t talk nonsense," exclaimed the shark, who did not like being laughed at. "What do you mean about a washerman's donkey? And I wish you would be quick, or we may be too late to save the sultan."
"Did you really never hear of the washerman's donkey?" asked the monkey, who was enjoying himself immensely. "Why, he is the beast who has no heart. And as I am not feeling very well, and am afraid to start while the sun is so high lest I should get a sunstroke, if you like, I will come a little nearer and tell you his story."
"Very well," said the shark sulkily, "if you won"t come, I suppose I may as well listen to that as do nothing."
So the monkey began.

A washerman once lived in the great forest on the other side of the town, and he had a donkey to keep him company and to carry him wherever he wanted to go. For a time they got on very well, but by and bye the donkey grew lazy and ungrateful for her master's kindness, and ran away several miles into the heart of the forest, where she did nothing but eat and eat and eat, till she grew so fat she could hardly move.
One day as she was tasting quite a new kind of grass and wondering if it was as good as what she had had for dinner the day before, a hare happened to pass by.
"Well, that is a fat creature," thought she, and turned out of her path to tell the news to a lion who was a friend of hers. Now the lion had been very ill, and was not strong enough to go hunting for himself, and when the hare came and told him that a very fat donkey was to be found only a few hundred yards off, tears of disappointment and weakness filled his eyes.
"What is the good of telling me that?" he asked, in a weepy voice; "you know I cannot even walk as far as that palm."
"Never mind," answered the hare briskly. "If you can"t go to your dinner your dinner shall come to you," and nodding a farewell to the lion she went back to the donkey.
"Good morning," said she, bowing politely to the donkey, who lifted her head in surprise. "Excuse my interrupting you, but I have come on very important business."
"Indeed," answered the donkey, "it is most kind of you to take the trouble. May I inquire what the business is?"
"Certainly," replied the hare. "It is my friend the lion who has heard so much of your charms and good qualities that he has sent me to beg that you will give him your paw in marriage. He regrets deeply that he is unable to make the request in person, but he has been ill and is too weak to move."
"Poor fellow! How sad!" said the donkey. "But you must tell him that I feel honoured by his proposal, and will gladly consent to be Queen of the Beasts."
"Will you not come and tell him so yourself?" asked the hare.
Side by side they went down the road which led to the lion's house. It took a long while, for the donkey was so fat with eating she could only walk very slowly, and the hare, who could have run the distance in about five minutes, was obliged to creep along till she almost dropped with fatigue at not being able to go at her own pace. When at last they arrived the lion was sitting up at the entrance, looking very pale and thin. The donkey suddenly grew shy and hung her head, but the lion put on his best manners and invited both his visitors to come in and make themselves comfortable.
Very soon the hare got up and said, "Well, as I have another engagement I will leave you to make acquaintance with your future husband," and winking at the lion she bounded away.
The donkey expected that as soon as they were left alone the lion would begin to speak of their marriage, and where they should live, but as he said nothing she looked up. To her surprise and terror she saw him crouching in the corner, his eyes glaring with a red light, and with a loud roar he sprang towards her. But in that moment the donkey had had time to prepare herself, and jumping on one side dealt the lion such a hard kick that he shrieked with the pain. Again and again he struck at her with his claws, but the donkey could bite too, as well as the lion, who was very weak after his illness, and at last a well- planted kick knocked him right over, and he rolled on the floor, groaning with pain. The donkey did not wait for him to get up, but ran away as fast as she could and was lost in the forest.
Now the hare, who knew quite well what would happen, had not gone to do her business, but hid herself in some bushes behind the cave, where she could hear quite clearly the sounds of the battle. When all was quiet again she crept gently out, and stole round the corner.
"Well, lion, have you killed her?" asked she, running swiftly up the path.
"Killed her, indeed!" answered the lion sulkily, "it is she who has nearly killed me. I never knew a donkey could kick like that, though I took care she should carry away the marks of my claws."
"Dear me! Fancy such a great fat creature being able to fight!" cried the hare. "But don"t vex yourself. Just lie still, and your wounds will soon heal," and she bade her friend, good bye, and returned to her family.
Two or three weeks passed, and only bare places on the donkey's back showed where the lion's claws had been, while, on his side, the lion had recovered from his illness and was now as strong as ever. He was beginning to think that it was almost time for him to begin hunting again, when one morning a rustle was heard in the creepers outside, and the hare's head peeped through.
"Ah! there is no need to ask how you are," she said. "Still you mustn"t overtire yourself, you know. Shall I go and bring you your dinner?"
"If you will bring me that donkey I will tear it in two," cried the lion savagely, and the hare laughed and nodded and went on her errand.
This time the donkey was much further than before, and it took longer to find her. At last the hare caught sight of four hoofs in the air, and ran towards them. The donkey was lying on a soft cool bed of moss near a stream, rolling herself backwards and forwards from pleasure.
"Good morning," said the hare politely, and the donkey got slowly on to her legs, and looked to see who her visitor could be.
"Oh, it is you, is it?" she exclaimed. "Come and have a chat. What news have you got?"
"I mustn"t stay," answered the hare; "but I promised the lion to beg you to pay him a visit, as he is not well enough to call on you."
"Well, I don"t know," replied the donkey gloomily, "the last time we went he scratched me very badly, and really I was quite afraid."
"He was only trying to kiss you," said the hare, "and you bit him, and of course that made him cross."
"If I were sure of that," hesitated the donkey.
"Oh, you may be quite sure," laughed the hare. "I have a large acquaintance among lions. But let us be quick," and rather unwillingly the donkey set out.
The lion saw them coming and hid himself behind a large tree. As the donkey went past, followed by the hare, he sprang out, and with one blow of his paw stretched the poor foolish creature dead before him.
"Take this meat and skin it and roast it," he said to the hare; "but my appetite is not so good as it was, and the only part I want for myself is the heart. The rest you can either eat yourself or give away to your friends."
"Thank you," replied the hare, balancing the donkey on her back as well as she was able, and though the legs trailed along the ground she managed to drag it to an open space some distance off, where she made a fire and roasted it. As soon as it was cooked the hare took out the heart and had just finished eating it when the lion, who was tired of waiting, came up.
"I am hungry," said he. "Bring me the creature's heart; it is just what I want for supper."
"But there is no heart," answered the hare, looking up at the lion with a puzzled face.
"What nonsense!" said the lion. "As if every beast had not got a heart. What do you mean?"
"This is a washerman's donkey," replied the hare gravely.
"Well, and suppose it is?"
"Oh, fie!" exclaimed the hare. "You, a lion and a grown-up person, and ask questions like that. If the donkey had had a heart would she be here now? The first time she came she knew you were trying to kill her, and ran away. Yet she came back a second time. Well, if she had had a heart would she have come back a second time? Now would she?"
And the lion answered slowly, "No, she would not."
So you think I am a washerman's donkey?" said the monkey to the shark, when the story was ended. "You are wrong; I am not. And as the sun is getting low in the sky, it is time for you to begin your homeward journey. You will have a nice cool voyage, and I hope you will find the sultan better. Farewell!" And the monkey disappeared among the green branches, and was gone.

A long, long way off, in a land where water is very scarce, there lived a man and his wife and several children. One day the wife said to her husband, "I am pining to have the liver of a nyamatsane for my dinner. If you love me as much as you say you do, you will go out and hunt for a nyamatsane, and will kill it and get its liver. If not, I shall know that your love is not worth having."
"Bake some bread," was all her husband answered, "then take the crust and put it in this little bag."
The wife did as she was told, and when she had finished she said to her husband, "The bag is all ready and quite full."
"Very well," said he, "and now good-bye; I am going after the nyamatsane."
But the nyamatsane was not so easy to find as the woman had hoped. The husband walked on and on and on without ever seeing one, and every now and then he felt so hungry that he was obliged to eat one of the crusts of bread out of his bag. At last, when he was ready to drop from fatigue, he found himself on the edge of a great marsh, which bordered on one side the country of the nyamatsanes. But there were no more nyamatsanes here than anywhere else. They had all gone on a hunting expedition, as their larder was empty, and the only person left at home was their grandmother, who was so feeble she never went out of the house. Our friend looked on this as a great piece of luck, and made haste to kill her before the others returned, and to take out her liver, after which he dressed himself in her skin as well as he could. He had scarcely done this when he heard the noise of the nyamatsanes coming back to their grandmother, for they were very fond of her, and never stayed away from her longer than they could help. They rushed clattering into the hut, exclaiming, "We smell human flesh! Some man is here," and began to look about for him; but they only saw their old grandmother, who answered, in a trembling voice, "No, my children, no! What should any man be doing here?" The nyamatsanes paid no attention to her, and began to open all the cupboards, and peep under all the beds, crying out all the while, "A man is here! a man is here!" but they could find nobody, and at length, tired out with their long day's hunting, they curled themselves up and fell asleep.
Next morning they woke up quite refreshed, and made ready to start on another expedition; but as they did not feel happy about their grandmother they said to her, "Grandmother, won"t you come to-day and feed with us?" And they led their grandmother outside, and all of them began hungrily to eat pebbles. Our friend pretended to do the same, but in reality he slipped the stones into his pouch, and swallowed the crusts of bread instead. However, as the nyamatsanes did not see this they had no idea that he was not really their grandmother. When they had eaten a great many pebbles they thought they had done enough for that day, and all went home together and curled themselves up to sleep. Next morning when they woke they said, "Let us go and amuse ourselves by jumping over the ditch," and every time they cleared it with a bound. Then they begged their grandmother to jump over it too, end with a tremendous effort she managed to spring right over to the other side. After this they had no doubt at all of its being their true grandmother, and went off to their hunting, leaving our friend at home in the hut.
As soon as they had gone out of sight our hero made haste to take the liver from the place where he had hid it, threw off the skin of the old nyamatsane, and ran away as hard as he could, only stopping to pick up a very brilliant and polished little stone, which he put in his bag by the side of the liver.
Towards evening the nyamatsanes came back to the hut full of anxiety to know how their grandmother had got on during their absence. The first thing they saw on entering the door was her skin lying on the floor, and then they knew that they had been deceived, and they said to each other, 'so we were right, after all, and it was human flesh we smelt." Then they stooped down to find traces of the man's footsteps, and when they had got them instantly set out in hot pursuit.
Meanwhile our friend had journeyed many miles, and was beginning to feel quite safe and comfortable, when, happening to look round, he saw in the distance a thick cloud of dust moving rapidly. His heart stood still within him, and he said to himself, "I am lost. It is the nyamatsanes, and they will tear me in pieces," and indeed the cloud of dust was drawing near with amazing quickness, and the nyamatsanes almost felt as if they were already devouring him. Then as a last hope the man took the little stone that he had picked up out of his bag and flung it on the ground. The moment it touched the soil it became a huge rock, whose steep sides were smooth as glass, and on the top of it our hero hastily seated himself. It was in vain that the nyamatsanes tried to climb up and reach him; they slid down again much faster than they had gone up; and by sunset they were quite worn out, and fell asleep at the foot of the rock.
No sooner had the nyamatsanes tumbled off to sleep than the man stole softly down and fled away as fast as his legs would carry him, and by the time his enemies were awake he was a very long way off. They sprang quickly to their feet and began to sniff the soil round the rock, in order to discover traces of his footsteps, and they galloped after him with terrific speed. The chase continued for several days and nights; several times the nyamatsanes almost reached him, and each time he was saved by his little pebble.
Between his fright and his hurry he was almost dead of exhaustion when he reached his own village, where the nyamatsanes could not follow him, because of their enemies the dogs, which swarmed over all the roads. So they returned home.
Then our friend staggered into his own hut and called to his wife: "Ichou! how tired I am! Quick, give me something to drink. Then go and get fuel and light a fire."
So she did what she was bid, and then her husband took the nyamatsane's liver from his pouch and said to her, "There, I have brought you what you wanted, and now you know that I love you truly."
And the wife answered, "It is well. Now go and take out the children, so that I may remain alone in the hut," and as she spoke she lifted down an old stone pot and put on the liver to cook. Her husband watched her for a moment, and then said, "Be sure you eat it all yourself. Do not give a scrap to any of the children, but eat every morsel up." So the woman took the liver and ate it all herself.
Directly the last mouthful had disappeared she was seized with such violent thirst that she caught up a great pot full of water and drank it at a single draught. Then, having no more in the house, she ran in next door and said, "Neighbour, give me, I pray you, something to drink." The neighbour gave her a large vessel quite full, and the woman drank it off at a single draught, and held it out for more.
But the neighbour pushed her away, saying, "No, I shall have none left for my children."
So the woman went into another house, and drank all the water she could find; but the more she drank the more thirsty she became. She wandered in this manner through the whole village till she had drunk every water-pot dry. Then she rushed off to the nearest spring, and swallowed that, and when she had finished all the springs and wells about she drank up first the river and then a lake. But by this time she had drunk so much that she could not rise from the ground.
In the evening, when it was time for the animals to have their drink before going to bed, they found the lake quite dry, and they had to make up their minds to be thirsty till the water flowed again and the streams were full. Even then, for some time, the lake was very dirty, and the lion, as king of the beasts, commanded that no one should drink till it was quite clear again.
But the little hare, who was fond of having his own way, and was very thirsty besides, stole quietly off when all the rest were asleep in their dens, and crept down to the margin of the lake and drank his fill. Then he smeared the dirty water all over the rabbit's face and paws, so that it might look as if it were he who had been disobeying Big Lion's orders.
The next day, as soon as it was light, Big Lion marched straight for the lake, and all the other beasts followed him. He saw at once that the water had been troubled again, and was very angry.
"Who has been drinking my water?" said he; and the little hare gave a jump, and, pointing to the rabbit, he answered, "Look there! it must be he! Why, there is mud all over his face and paws!"
The rabbit, frightened out of his wits, tried to deny the fact, exclaiming, "Oh, no, indeed I never did;" but Big Lion would not listen, and commanded them to cane him with a birch rod.
Now the little hare was very much pleased with his cleverness in causing the rabbit to be beaten instead of himself, and went about boasting of it. At last one of the other animals overheard him, and called out, "Little hare, little hare! what is that you are saying?"
But the little hare hastily replied, "I only asked you to pass me my stick."
An hour or two later, thinking that no one was near him, he said to himself again, "It was really I who drank up the water, but I made them think it was the rabbit."
But one of the beasts whose ears were longer than the rest caught the words, and went to tell Big Lion about it. Do you hear what the little hare is saying?"
So Big Lion sent for the little hare, and asked him what he meant by talking like that.
The little hare saw that there was no use trying to hide it, so he answered pertly, "It was I who drank the water, but I made them think it was the rabbit." Then he turned and ran as fast as he could, with all the other beasts pursuing him.
They were almost up to him when he dashed into a very narrow cleft in the rock, much too small for them to follow; but in his hurry he had left one of his long ears sticking out, which they just managed to seize. But pull as hard as they might they could not drag him out of the hole, and at last they gave it up and left him, with his ear very much torn and scratched.
When the last tail was out of sight the little hare crept cautiously out, and the first person he met was the rabbit. He had plenty of impudence, so he put a bold face on the matter, and said, "Well, my good rabbit, you see I have had a beating as well as you."
But the rabbit was still sore and sulky, and he did not care to talk, so he answered, coldly, "You have treated me very badly. It was really you who drank that water, and you accused me of having done it."
"Oh, my good rabbit, never mind that! I"ve got such a wonderful secret to tell you! Do you know what to do so as to escape death?"
"No, I don"t."
"Well, we must begin by digging a hole."
So they dug a hole, and then the little hare said, "The next thing is to make a fire in the hole," and they set to work to collect wood, and lit quite a large fire.
When it was burning brightly the little hare said to the rabbit, "Rabbit, my friend, throw me into the fire, and when you hear my fur crackling, and I call "Itchi, Itchi," then be quick and pull me out."
The rabbit did as he was told, and threw the little hare into the fire; but no sooner did the little hare begin to feel the heat of the flames than he took some green bay leaves he had plucked for the purpose and held them in the middle of the fire, where they crackled and made a great noise. Then he called loudly "Itchi, Itchi! Rabbit, my friend, be quick, be quick! Don"t you hear how my skin is crackling?"
And the rabbit came in a great hurry and pulled him out.
Then the little hare said, "Now it is your turn!" and he threw the rabbit in the fire. The moment the rabbit felt the flames he cried out "Itchi, Itchi, I am burning; pull me out quick, my friend!"
But the little hare only laughed, and said, "No, you may stay there! It is your own fault. Why were you such a fool as to let yourself be thrown in? Didn"t you know that fire burns?" And in a very few minutes nothing was left of the rabbit but a few bones.
When the fire was quite out the little hare went and picked up one of these bones, and made a flute out of it, and sang this song:
Pii, pii, O flute that I love, Pii, pii, rabbits are but little boys. Pii, pii, he would have burned me if he could; Pii, pii, but I burned him, and he crackled finely.
When he got tired of going through the world singing this the little hare went back to his friends and entered the service of Big Lion. One day he said to his master, "Grandfather, shall I show you a splendid way to kill game?"
"What is it?" asked Big Lion.
"We must dig a ditch, and then you must lie in it and pretend to be dead."
Big Lion did as he was told, and when he had lain down the little hare got up on a wall blew a trumpet and shouted—
Pii, pii, all you animals come and see, Big Lion is dead, and now peace will be.
Directly they heard this they all came running. The little hare received them and said, "Pass on, this way to the lion." So they all entered into the Animal Kingdom. Last of all came the monkey with her baby on her back. She approached the ditch, and took a blade of grass and tickled Big Lion's nose, and his nostrils moved in spite of his efforts to keep them still. Then the monkey cried, "Come, my baby, climb on my back and let us go. What sort of a dead body is it that can still feel when it is tickled?" And she and her baby went away in a fright. Then the little hare said to the other beasts, "Now, shut the gate of the Animal Kingdom." And it was shut, and great stones were rolled against it. When everything was tight closed the little hare turned to Big Lion and said "Now!" and Big Lion bounded out of the ditch and tore the other animals in pieces.
But Big Lion kept all the choice bits for himself, and only gave away the little scraps that he did not care about eating; and the little hare grew very angry, and determined to have his revenge. He had long ago found out that Big Lion was very easily taken in; so he laid his plans accordingly. He said to him, as if the idea had just come into his head, "Grandfather, let us build a hut," and Big Lion consented. And when they had driven the stakes into the ground, and had made the walls of the hut, the little hare told Big Lion to climb upon the top while he stayed inside. When he was ready he called out, "Now, grandfather, begin," and Big Lion passed his rod through the reeds with which the roofs are always covered in that country. The little hare took it and cried, "Now it is my turn to pierce them," and as he spoke he passed the rod back through the reeds and gave Big Lion's tail a sharp poke.
"What is pricking me so?" asked Big Lion.
"Oh, just a little branch sticking out. I am going to break it," answered the little hare; but of course he had done it on purpose, as he wanted to fix Big Lion's tail so firmly to the hut that he would not be able to move. In a little while he gave another prick, and Big Lion called again, "What is pricking me so?"
This time the little hare said to himself, "He will find out what I am at. I must try some other plan. 'so he called out, "Grandfather, you had better put your tongue here, so that the branches shall not touch you." Big Lion did as he was bid, and the little hare tied it tightly to the stakes of the wall. Then he went outside and shouted, "Grandfather, you can come down now," and Big Lion tried, but he could not move an inch.
Then the little hare began quietly to eat Big Lion's dinner right before his eyes, and paying no attention at all to his growls of rage. When he had quite done he climbed up on the hut, and, blowing his flute, he chanted "Pii, pii, fall rain and hail," and directly the sky was full of clouds, the thunder roared, and huge hailstones whitened the roof of the hut. The little hare, who had taken refuge within, called out again, "Big Lion, be quick and come down and dine with me." But there was no answer, not even a growl, for the hailstones had killed Big Lion.
The little hare enjoyed himself vastly for some time, living comfortably in the hut, with plenty of food to eat and no trouble at all in getting it. But one day a great wind arose, and flung down the Big Lion's half-dried skin from the roof of the hut. The little hare bounded with terror at the noise, for he thought Big Lion must have come to life again; but on discovering what had happened he set about cleaning the skin, and propped the mouth open with sticks so that he could get through. So, dressed in Big Lion's skin, the little hare started on his travels.
The first visit he paid was to the hyaenas, who trembled at the sight of him, and whispered to each other, "How shall we escape from this terrible beast?" Meanwhile the little hare did not trouble himself about them, but just asked where the king of the hyaenas lived, and made himself quite at home there. Every morning each hyaena thought to himself, "To-day he is certain to eat me;" but several days went by, and they were all still alive. At length, one evening, the little hare, looking round for something to amuse him, noticed a great pot full of boiling water, so he strolled up to one of the hyaenas and said, "Go and get in." The hyaena dared not disobey, and in a few minutes was scalded to death. Then the little hare went the round of the village, saying to every hyaena he met, "Go and get into the boiling water," so that in a little while there was hardly a male left in the village.
One day all the hyaenas that remained alive went out very early into the fields, leaving only one little daughter at home. The little hare, thinking he was all alone, came into the enclosure, and, wishing to feel what it was like to be a hare again, threw off Big Lion's skin, and began to jump and dance, singing—
I am just the little hare, the little hare, the little hare; I am just the little hare who killed the great hyaenas.
The little hyaena gazed at him in surprise, saying to herself, "What! was it really this tiny beast who put to death all our best people?" when suddenly a gust of wind rustled the reeds that surrounded the enclosure, and the little hare, in a fright, hastily sprang back into Big Lion's skin.
When the hyaenas returned to their homes the little hyaena said to her father: "Father, our tribe has very nearly been swept away, and all this has been the work of a tiny creature dressed in the lion's skin."
But her father answered, "Oh, my dear child, you don"t know what you are talking about."
She replied, "Yes, father, it is quite true. I saw it with my own eyes."
The father did not know what to think, and told one of his friends, who said, "To-morrow we had better keep watch ourselves."
And the next day they hid themselves and waited till the little hare came out of the royal hut. He walked gaily towards the enclosure, threw off, Big Lion's skin, and sang and danced as before—
I am just the little hare, the little hare, the little hare, I am just the little hare, who killed the great hyaenas.
That night the two hyaenas told all the rest, saying, "Do you know that we have allowed ourselves to be trampled on by a wretched creature with nothing of the lion about him but his skin?"
When supper was being cooked that evening, before they all went to bed, the little hare, looking fierce and terrible in Big Lion's skin, said as usual to one of the hyaenas "Go and get into the boiling water." But the hyaena never stirred. There was silence for a moment; then a hyaena took a stone, and flung it with all his force against the lion's skin. The little hare jumped out through the mouth with a single spring, and fled away like lightning, all the hyaenas in full pursuit uttering great cries. As he turned a corner the little hare cut off both his ears, so that they should not know him, and pretended to be working at a grindstone which lay there.
The hyaenas soon came up to him and said, "Tell me, friend, have you seen the little hare go by?"
"No, I have seen no one."
"Where can he be?" said the hyaenas one to another. "Of course, this creature is quite different, and not at all like the little hare." Then they went on their way, but, finding no traces of the little hare, they returned sadly to their village, saying, "To think we should have allowed ourselves to be swept away by a wretched creature like that!"

Once upon a time there lived a man who wasted all his money, and grew so poor that his only food was a few grains of corn, which he scratched like a fowl from out of a dust-heap.
One day he was scratching as usual among a dust-heap in the street, hoping to find something for breakfast, when his eye fell upon a small silver coin, called an eighth, which he greedily snatched up. "Now I can have a proper meal," he thought, and after drinking some water at a well he lay down and slept so long that it was sunrise before he woke again. Then he jumped up and returned to the dust-heap. "For who knows," he said to himself, "whether I may not have some good luck again."
As he was walking down the road, he saw a man coming towards him, carrying a cage made of twigs. "Hi! you fellow!" called he, "what have you got inside there?"
"Gazelles," replied the man.
"Bring them here, for I should like to see them."
As he spoke, some men who were standing by began to laugh, saying to the man with the cage: "You had better take care how you bargain with him, for he has nothing at all except what he picks up from a dust-heap, and if he can"t feed himself, will he be able to feed a gazelle?"
But the man with the cage made answer: 'since I started from my home in the country, fifty people at the least have called me to show them my gazelles, and was there one among them who cared to buy? It is the custom for a trader in merchandise to be summoned hither and thither, and who knows where one may find a buyer?" And he took up his cage and went towards the scratcher of dust-heaps, and the men went with him.
"What do you ask for your gazelles?" said the beggar. "Will you let me have one for an eighth?"
And the man with the cage took out a gazelle, and held it out, saying, "Take this one, master!"
And the beggar took it and carried it to the dust-heap, where he scratched carefully till he found a few grains of corn, which he divided with his gazelle. This he did night and morning, till five days went by.
Then, as he slept, the gazelle woke him, saying, "Master."
And the man answered, "How is it that I see a wonder?"
"What wonder?" asked the gazelle.
"Why, that you, a gazelle, should be able to speak, for, from the beginning, my father and mother and all the people that are in the world have never told me of a talking gazelle."
"Never mind that," said the gazelle, "but listen to what I say! First, I took you for my master. Second, you gave for me all you had in the world. I cannot run away from you, but give me, I pray you, leave to go every morning and seek food for myself, and every evening I will come back to you. What you find in the dust-heaps is not enough for both of us."
"Go, then," answered the master; and the gazelle went.
When the sun had set, the gazelle came back, and the poor man was very glad, and they lay down and slept side by side.
In the morning it said to him, "I am going away to feed."
And the man replied, "Go, my son," but he felt very lonely without his gazelle, and set out sooner than usual for the dust-heap where he generally found most corn. And glad he was when the evening came, and he could return home. He lay on the grass chewing tobacco, when the gazelle trotted up.
"Good evening, my master; how have you fared all day? I have been resting in the shade in a place where there is sweet grass when I am hungry, and fresh water when I am thirsty, and a soft breeze to fan me in the heat. It is far away in the forest, and no one knows of it but me, and to-morrow I shall go again."
So for five days the gazelle set off at daybreak for this cool spot, but on the fifth day it came to a place where the grass was bitter, and it did not like it, and scratched, hoping to tear away the bad blades. But, instead, it saw something lying in the earth, which turned out to be a diamond, very large and bright. "Oh, ho!" said the gazelle to itself, "perhaps now I can do something for my master who bought me with all the money he had; but I must be careful or they will say he has stolen it. I had better take it myself to some great rich man, and see what it will do for me."
Directly the gazelle had come to this conclusion, it picked up the diamond in its mouth, and went on and on and on through the forest, but found no place where a rich man was likely to dwell. For two more days it ran, from dawn to dark, till at last early one morning it caught sight of a large town, which gave it fresh courage.
The people were standing about the streets doing their marketing, when the gazelle bounded past, the diamond flashing as it ran. They called after it, but it took no notice till it reached the palace, where the sultan was sitting, enjoying the cool air. And the gazelle galloped up to him, and laid the diamond at his feet.
The sultan looked first at the diamond and next at the gazelle; then he ordered his attendants to bring cushions and a carpet, that the gazelle might rest itself after its long journey. And he likewise ordered milk to be brought, and rice, that it might eat and drink and be refreshed.
And when the gazelle was rested, the sultan said to it: "Give me the news you have come with."
And the gazelle answered: "I am come with this diamond, which is a pledge from my master the Sultan Darai. He has heard you have a daughter, and sends you this small token, and begs you will give her to him to wife."
And the sultan said: "I am content. The wife is his wife, the family is his family, the slave is his slave. Let him come to me empty-handed, I am content."
When the sultan had ended, the gazelle rose, and said: "Master, farewell; I go back to our town, and in eight days, or it may be in eleven days, we shall arrive as your guests."
And the sultan answered: 'so let it be."
All this time the poor man far away had been mourning and weeping for his gazelle, which he thought had run away from him for ever.
And when it came in at the door he rushed to embrace it with such joy that he would not allow it a chance to speak.
"Be still, master, and don"t cry," said the gazelle at last; "let us sleep now, and in the morning, when I go, follow me."
With the first ray of dawn they got up and went into the forest, and on the fifth day, as they were resting near a stream, the gazelle gave its master a sound beating, and then bade him stay where he was till it returned. And the gazelle ran off, and about ten o"clock it came near the sultan's palace, where the road was all lined with soldiers who were there to do honour to Sultan Darai. And directly they caught sight of the gazelle in the distance one of the soldiers ran on and said, 'sultan Darai is coming: I have seen the gazelle."
Then the sultan rose up, and called his whole court to follow him, and went out to meet the gazelle, who, bounding up to him, gave him greeting. The sultan answered politely, and inquired where it had left its master, whom it had promised to bring back.
"Alas!" replied the gazelle, "he is lying in the forest, for on our way here we were met by robbers, who, after beating and robbing him, took away all his clothes. And he is now hiding under a bush, lest a passing stranger might see him."
The sultan, on hearing what had happened to his future son-in-law, turned his horse and rode to the palace, and bade a groom to harness the best horse in the stable and order a woman slave to bring a bag of clothes, such as a man might want, out of the chest; and he chose out a tunic and a turban and a sash for the waist, and fetched himself a gold-hilted sword, and a dagger and a pair of sandals, and a stick of sweet-smelling wood.
"Now," said he to the gazelle, "take these things with the soldiers to the sultan, that he may be able to come."
And the gazelle answered: "Can I take those soldiers to go and put my master to shame as he lies there naked? I am enough by myself, my lord."
"How will you be enough," asked the sultan, "to manage this horse and all these clothes?"
"Oh, that is easily done," replied the gazelle. "Fasten the horse to my neck and tie the clothes to the back of the horse, and be sure they are fixed firmly, as I shall go faster than he does."
Everything was carried out as the gazelle had ordered, and when all was ready it said to the sultan: "Farewell, my lord, I am going."
"Farewell, gazelle," answered the sultan; "when shall we see you again?"
"To-morrow about five," replied the gazelle, and, giving a tug to the horse's rein, they set off at a gallop.
The sultan watched them till they were out of sight: then he said to his attendants, "That gazelle comes from gentle hands, from the house of a sultan, and that is what makes it so different from other gazelles." And in the eyes of the sultan the gazelle became a person of consequence.
Meanwhile the gazelle ran on till it came to the place where its master was seated, and his heart laughed when he saw the gazelle.
And the gazelle said to him, "Get up, my master, and bathe in the stream!" and when the man had bathed it said again, "Now rub yourself well with earth, and rub your teeth well with sand to make them bright and shining." And when this was done it said, "The sun has gone down behind the hills; it is time for us to go": so it went and brought the clothes from the back of the horse, and the man put them on and was well pleased.
"Master!" said the gazelle when the man was ready, "be sure that where we are going you keep silence, except for giving greetings and asking for news. Leave all the talking to me. I have provided you with a wife, and have made her presents of clothes and turbans and rare and precious things, so it is needless for you to speak."
"Very good, I will be silent," replied the man as he mounted the horse. "You have given all this; it is you who are the master, and I who am the slave, and I will obey you in all things."
'so they went their way, and they went and went till the gazelle saw in the distance the palace of the sultan. Then it said, "Master, that is the house we are going to, and you are not a poor man any longer: even your name is new."
"What IS my name, eh, my father?" asked the man.
'sultan Darai," said the gazelle.
Very soon some soldiers came to meet them, while others ran off to tell the sultan of their approach. And the sultan set off at once, and the viziers and the emirs, and the judges, and the rich men of the city, all followed him.
Directly the gazelle saw them coming, it said to its master: "Your father-in-law is coming to meet you; that is he in the middle, wearing a mantle of sky-blue. Get off your horse and go to greet him."
And Sultan Darai leapt from his horse, and so did the other sultan, and they gave their hands to one another and kissed each other, and went together into the palace.
The next morning the gazelle went to the rooms of the sultan, and said to him: "My lord, we want you to marry us our wife, for the soul of Sultan Darai is eager."
"The wife is ready, so call the priest," answered he, and when the ceremony was over a cannon was fired and music was played, and within the palace there was feasting.
"Master," said the gazelle the following morning, "I am setting out on a journey, and I shall not be back for seven days, and perhaps not then. But be careful not to leave the house till I come."
And the master answered, "I will not leave the house."
And it went to the sultan of the country and said to him: "My lord, Sultan Darai has sent me to his town to get the house in order. It will take me seven days, and if I am not back in seven days he will not leave the palace till I return."
"Very good," said the sultan.
And it went and it went through the forest and wilderness, till it arrived at a town full of fine houses. At the end of the chief road was a great house, beautiful exceedingly, built of sapphire and turquoise and marbles. "That," thought the gazelle, "is the house for my master, and I will call up my courage and go and look at the people who are in it, if any people there are. For in this town have I as yet seen no people. If I die, I die, and if I live, I live. Here can I think of no plan, so if anything is to kill me, it will kill me."
Then it knocked twice at the door, and cried "Open," but no one answered. And it cried again, and a voice replied:
"Who are you that are crying "Open"?"
And the gazelle said, "It is I, great mistress, your grandchild."
"If you are my grandchild," returned the voice, "go back whence you came. Don"t come and die here, and bring me to my death as well."
"Open, mistress, I entreat, I have something to say to you."
"Grandchild," replied she, "I fear to put your life in danger, and my own too."
"Oh, mistress, my life will not be lost, nor yours either; open, I pray you." So she opened the door.
"What is the news where you come from, my grandson," asked she.
"Great lady, where I come from it is well, and with you it is well."
"Ah, my son, here it is not well at all. If you seek a way to die, or if you have not yet seen death, then is to-day the day for you to know what dying is."
"If I am to know it, I shall know it," replied the gazelle; "but tell me, who is the lord of this house?"
And she said: "Ah, father! in this house is much wealth, and much people, and much food, and many horses. And the lord of it all is an exceeding great and wonderful snake."
"Oh!" cried the gazelle when he heard this; "tell me how I can get at the snake to kill him?"
"My son," returned the old woman, "do not say words like these; you risk both our lives. He has put me here all by myself, and I have to cook his food. When the great snake is coming there springs up a wind, and blows the dust about, and this goes on till the great snake glides into the courtyard and calls for his dinner, which must always be ready for him in those big pots. He eats till he has had enough, and then drinks a whole tankful of water. After that he goes away. Every second day he comes, when the sun is over the house. And he has seven heads. How then can you be a match for him, my son?"
"Mind your own business, mother," answered the gazelle, "and don"t mind other people's! Has this snake a sword?"
"He has a sword, and a sharp one too. It cuts like a dash of lightning."
"Give it to me, mother!" said the gazelle, and she unhooked the sword from the wall, as she was bidden. "You must be quick," she said, "for he may be here at any moment. Hark! is not that the wind rising? He has come!"
They were silent, but the old woman peeped from behind a curtain, and saw the snake busy at the pots which she had placed ready for him in the courtyard. And after he had done eating and drinking he came to the door:
"You old body!" he cried; "what smell is that I smell inside that is not the smell of every day?"
"Oh, master!" answered she, "I am alone, as I always am! But to-day, after many days, I have sprinkled fresh scent all over me, and it is that which you smell. What else could it be, master?"
All this time the gazelle had been standing close to the door, holding the sword in one of its front paws. And as the snake put one of his heads through the hole that he had made so as to get in and out comfortably, it cut it of so clean that the snake really did not feel it. The second blow was not quite so straight, for the snake said to himself, "Who is that who is trying to scratch me?" and stretched out his third head to see; but no sooner was the neck through the hole than the head went rolling to join the rest.
When six of his heads were gone the snake lashed his tail with such fury that the gazelle and the old woman could not see each other for the dust he made. And the gazelle said to him, "You have climbed all sorts of trees, but this you can"t climb," and as the seventh head came darting through it went rolling to join the rest.
Then the sword fell rattling on the ground, for the gazelle had fainted.
The old woman shrieked with delight when she saw her enemy was dead, and ran to bring water to the gazelle, and fanned it, and put it where the wind could blow on it, till it grew better and gave a sneeze. And the heart of the old woman was glad, and she gave it more water, till by-and-by the gazelle got up.
'show me this house," it said, "from beginning to end, from top to bottom, from inside to out."
So she arose and showed the gazelle rooms full of gold and precious things, and other rooms full of slaves. "They are all yours, goods and slaves," said she.
But the gazelle answered, "You must keep them safe till I call my master."
For two days it lay and rested in the house, and fed on milk and rice, and on the third day it bade the old woman farewell and started back to its master.
And when he heard that the gazelle was at the door he felt like a man who has found the time when all prayers are granted, and he rose and kissed it, saying: "My father, you have been a long time; you have left sorrow with me. I cannot eat, I cannot drink, I cannot laugh; my heart felt no smile at anything, because of thinking of you."
And the gazelle answered: "I am well, and where I come from it is well, and I wish that after four days you would take your wife and go home."
And he said: "It is for you to speak. Where you go, I will follow."
"Then I shall go to your father-in-law and tell him this news."
"Go, my son."
So the gazelle went to the father-in-law and said: "I am sent by my master to come and tell you that after four days he will go away with his wife to his own home."
"Must he really go so quickly? We have not yet sat much together, I and Sultan Darai, nor have we yet talked much together, nor have we yet ridden out together, nor have we eaten together; yet it is fourteen days since he came."
But the gazelle replied: "My lord, you cannot help it, for he wishes to go home, and nothing will stop him."
"Very good," said the sultan, and he called all the people who were in the town, and commanded that the day his daughter left the palace ladies and guards were to attend her on her way.
And at the end of four days a great company of ladies and slaves and horses went forth to escort the wife of Sultan Darai to her new home. They rode all day, and when the sun sank behind the hills they rested, and ate of the food the gazelle gave them, and lay down to sleep. And they journeyed on for many days, and they all, nobles and slaves, loved the gazelle with a great love– more than they loved the Sultan Darai.
At last one day signs of houses appeared, far, far off. And those who saw cried out, "Gazelle!"
And it answered, "Ah, my mistresses, that is the house of Sultan Darai."
At this news the women rejoiced much, and the slaves rejoiced much, and in the space of two hours they came to the gates, and the gazelle bade them all stay behind, and it went on to the house with Sultan Darai.
When the old woman saw them coming through the courtyard she jumped and shouted for joy, and as the gazelle drew near she seized it in her arms, and kissed it. The gazelle did not like this, and said to her: "Old woman, leave me alone; the one to be carried is my master, and the one to be kissed is my master."
And she answered, "Forgive me, my son. I did not know this was our master," and she threw open all the doors so that the master might see everything that the rooms and storehouses contained. Sultan Darai looked about him, and at length he said:
"Unfasten those horses that are tied up, and let loose those people that are bound. And let some sweep, and some spread the beds, and some cook, and some draw water, and some come out and receive the mistress."
And when the sultana and her ladies and her slaves entered the house, and saw the rich stuffs it was hung with, and the beautiful rice that was prepared for them to eat, they cried: "Ah, you gazelle, we have seen great houses, we have seen people, we have heard of things. But this house, and you, such as you are, we have never seen or heard of."
After a few days, the ladies said they wished to go home again. The gazelle begged them hard to stay, but finding they would not, it brought many gifts, and gave some to the ladies and some to their slaves. And they all thought the gazelle greater a thousand times than its master, Sultan Darai.
The gazelle and its master remained in the house many weeks, and one day it said to the old woman, "I came with my master to this place, and I have done many things for my master, good things, and till to-day he has never asked me: "Well, my gazelle, how did you get this house? Who is the owner of it? And this town, were there no people in it?" All good things I have done for the master, and he has not one day done me any good thing. But people say, "If you want to do any one good, don"t do him good only, do him evil also, and there will be peace between you." So, mother, I have done: I want to see the favours I have done to my master, that he may do me the like."
"Good," replied the old woman, and they went to bed.
In the morning, when light came, the gazelle was sick in its stomach and feverish, and its legs ached. And it said "Mother!"
And she answered, "Here, my son?"
And it said, "Go and tell my master upstairs the gazelle is very ill."
"Very good, my son; and if he should ask me what is the matter, what am I to say?"
"Tell him all my body aches badly; I have no single part without pain."
The old woman went upstairs, and she found the mistress and master sitting on a couch of marble spread with soft cushions, and they asked her, "Well, old woman, what do you want?"
"To tell the master the gazelle is ill," said she.
"What is the matter?" asked the wife.
"All its body pains; there is no part without pain."
"Well, what can I do? Make some gruel of red millet, and give to it."
But his wife stared and said: "Oh, master, do you tell her to make the gazelle gruel out of red millet, which a horse would not eat? Eh, master, that is not well."
But he answered, "Oh, you are mad! Rice is only kept for people."
"Eh, master, this is not like a gazelle. It is the apple of your eye. If sand got into that, it would trouble you."
"My wife, your tongue is long," and he left the room.
The old woman saw she had spoken vainly, and went back weeping to the gazelle. And when the gazelle saw her it said, "Mother, what is it, and why do you cry? If it be good, give me the answer; and if it be bad, give me the answer."
But still the old woman would not speak, and the gazelle prayed her to let it know the words of the master. At last she said: "I went upstairs and found the mistress and the master sitting on a couch, and he asked me what I wanted, and I told him that you, his slave, were ill. And his wife asked what was the matter, and I told her that there was not a part of your body without pain. And the master told me to take some red millet and make you gruel, but the mistress said, "Eh, master, the gazelle is the apple of your eye; you have no child, this gazelle is like your child; so this gazelle is not one to be done evil to. This is a gazelle in form, but not a gazelle in heart; he is in all things better than a gentleman, be he who he may."
And he answered her, 'silly chatterer, your words are many. I know its price; I bought it for an eighth. What loss will it be to me?"
The gazelle kept silence for a few moments. Then it said, "The elders said, "One that does good like a mother," and I have done him good, and I have got this that the elders said. But go up again to the master, and tell him the gazelle is very ill, and it has not drunk the gruel of red millet."
So the old woman returned, and found the master and the mistress drinking coffee. And when he heard what the gazelle had said, he cried: "Hold your peace, old woman, and stay your feet and close your eyes, and stop your ears with wax; and if the gazelle bids you come to me, say your legs are bent, and you cannot walk; and if it begs you to listen, say your ears are stopped with wax; and if it wishes to talk, reply that your tongue has got a hook in it."
The heart of the old woman wept as she heard such words, because she saw that when the gazelle first came to that town it was ready to sell its life to buy wealth for its master. Then it happened to get both life and wealth, but now it had no honour with its master.
And tears sprung likewise to the eyes of the sultan's wife, and she said, "I am sorry for you, my husband, that you should deal so wickedly with that gazelle"; but he only answered, "Old woman, pay no heed to the talk of the mistress: tell it to perish out of the way. I cannot sleep, I cannot eat, I cannot drink, for the worry of that gazelle. Shall a creature that I bought for an eighth trouble me from morning till night? Not so, old woman!"
The old woman went downstairs, and there lay the gazelle, blood flowing from its nostrils. And she took it in her arms and said, "My son, the good you did is lost; there remains only patience."
And it said, "Mother, I shall die, for my soul is full of anger and bitterness. My face is ashamed, that I should have done good to my master, and that he should repay me with evil." It paused for a moment, and then went on, "Mother, of the goods that are in this house, what do I eat? I might have every day half a basinful, and would my master be any the poorer? But did not the elders say, "He that does good like a mother!" "
And it said, "Go and tell my master that the gazelle is nearer death than life."
So she went, and spoke as the gazelle had bidden her; but he answered, "I have told you to trouble me no more."
But his wife's heart was sore, and she said to him: "Ah, master, what has the gazelle done to you? How has he failed you? The things you do to him are not good, and you will draw on yourself the hatred of the people. For this gazelle is loved by all, by small and great, by women and men. Ah, my husband! I thought you had great wisdom, and you have not even a little!"
But he answered, "You are mad, my wife."
The old woman stayed no longer, and went back to the gazelle, followed secretly by the mistress, who called a maidservant and bade her take some milk and rice and cook it for the gazelle.
"Take also this cloth," she said, "to cover it with, and this pillow for its head. And if the gazelle wants more, let it ask me, and not its master. And if it will, I will send it in a litter to my father, and he will nurse it till it is well."
And the maidservant did as her mistress bade her, and said what her mistress had told her to say, but the gazelle made no answer, but turned over on its side and died quietly.
When the news spread abroad, there was much weeping among the people, and Sultan Darai arose in wrath, and cried, "You weep for that gazelle as if you wept for me! And, after all, what is it but a gazelle, that I bought for an eighth?"
But his wife answered, "Master, we looked upon that gazelle as we looked upon you. It was the gazelle who came to ask me of my father, it was the gazelle who brought me from my father, and I was given in charge to the gazelle by my father."
And when the people heard her they lifted up their voices and spoke:
"We never saw you, we saw the gazelle. It was the gazelle who met with trouble here, it was the gazelle who met with rest here.
So, then, when such an one departs from this world we weep for ourselves, we do not weep for the gazelle."
And they said furthermore:
"The gazelle did you much good, and if anyone says he could have done more for you he is a liar! Therefore, to us who have done you no good, what treatment will you give? The gazelle has died from bitterness of soul, and you ordered your slaves to throw it into the well. Ah! leave us alone that we may weep."
But Sultan Darai would not heed their words, and the dead gazelle was thrown into the well.
When the mistress heard of it, she sent three slaves, mounted on donkeys, with a letter to her father the sultan, and when the sultan had read the letter he bowed his head and wept, like a man who had lost his mother. And he commanded horses to be saddled, and called the governor and the judges and all the rich men, and said:
"Come now with me; let us go and bury it."
Night and day they travelled, till the sultan came to the well where the gazelle had been thrown. And it was a large well, built round a rock, with room for many people; and the sultan entered, and the judges and the rich men followed him. And when he saw the gazelle lying there he wept afresh, and took it in his arms and carried it away.
When the three slaves went and told their mistress what the sultan had done, and how all the people were weeping, she answered:
"I too have eaten no food, neither have I drunk water, since the day the gazelle died. I have not spoken, and I have not laughed."
The sultan took the gazelle and buried it, and ordered the people to wear mourning for it, so there was great mourning throughout the city.
Now after the days of mourning were at an end, the wife was sleeping at her husband's side, and in her sleep she dreamed that she was once more in her father's house, and when she woke up it was no dream.
And the man dreamed that he was on the dust-heap, scratching. And when he woke, behold! that also was no dream, but the truth.

Once upon a time there lived a poor woman who had only one child, and he was a little boy called Hassebu. When he ceased to be a baby, and his mother thought it was time for him to learn to read, she sent him to school. And, after he had done with school, he was put into a shop to learn how to make clothes, and did not learn; and he was put to do silversmith's work, and did not learn; and whatsoever he was taught, he did not learn it. His mother never wished him to do anything he did not like, so she said: "Well, stay at home, my son." And he stayed at home, eating and sleeping.
One day the boy said to his mother: "What was my father's business?"
"He was a very learned doctor," answered she.
"Where, then, are his books?" asked Hassebu.
"Many days have passed, and I have thought nothing of them. But look inside and see if they are there." So Hassebu looked, and saw they were eaten by insects, all but one book, which he took away and read.
He was sitting at home one morning poring over the medicine book, when some neighbours came by and said to his mother: "Give us this boy, that we may go together to cut wood." For wood-cutting was their trade, and they loaded several donkeys with the wood, and sold it in the town.
And his mother answered, "Very well; to-morrow I will buy him a donkey, and you can all go together."
So the donkey was bought, and the neighbours came, and they worked hard all day, and in the evening they brought the wood back into the town, and sold it for a good sum of money. And for six days they went and did the like, but on the seventh it rained, and the wood-cutters ran and hid in the rocks, all but Hassebu, who did not mind wetting, and stayed where he was.
While he was sitting in the place where the wood-cutters had left him, he took up a stone that lay near him, and idly dropped it on the ground. It rang with a hollow sound, and he called to his companions, and said, "Come here and listen; the ground seems hollow!"
"Knock again!" cried they. And he knocked and listened.
"Let us dig," said the boy. And they dug, and found a large pit like a well, filled with honey up to the brim.
"This is better than firewood," said they; "it will bring us more money. And as you have found it, Hassebu, it is you who must go inside and dip out the honey and give to us, and we will take it to the town and sell it, and will divide the money with you."
The following day each man brought every bowl and vessel he could find at home, and Hassebu filled them all with honey. And this he did every day for three months.
At the end of that time the honey was very nearly finished, and there was only a little left, quite at the bottom, and that was very deep down, so deep that it seemed as if it must be right in the middle of the earth. Seeing this, the men said to Hassebu, "We will put a rope under your arms, and let you down, so that you may scrape up all the honey that is left, and when you have done we will lower the rope again, and you shall make it fast, and we will draw you up."
"Very well," answered the boy, and he went down, and he scraped and scraped till there was not so much honey left as would cover the point of a needle. "Now I am ready!" he cried; but they consulted together and said, "Let us leave him there inside the pit, and take his share of the money, and we will tell his mother, "Your son was caught by a lion and carried off into the forest, and we tried to follow him, but could not." "
Then they arose and went into the town and told his mother as they had agreed, and she wept much and made her mourning for many months. And when the men were dividing the money, one said, "Let us send a little to our friend's mother," and they sent some to her; and every day one took her rice, and one oil; one took her meat, and one took her cloth, every day.
It did not take long for Hassebu to find out that his companions had left him to die in the pit, but he had a brave heart, and hoped that he might be able to find a way out for himself. So he at once began to explore the pit and found it ran back a long way underground. And by night he slept, and by day he took a little of the honey he had gathered and ate it; and so many days passed by.
One morning, while he was sitting on a rock having his breakfast, a large scorpion dropped down at his feet, and he took a stone and killed it, fearing it would sting him. Then suddenly the thought darted into his head, "This scorpion must have come from somewhere! Perhaps there is a hole. I will go and look for it," and he felt all round the walls of the pit till he found a very little hole in the roof of the pit, with a tiny glimmer of light at the far end of it. Then his heart felt glad, and he took out his knife and dug and dug, till the little hole became a big one, and he could wriggle himself through. And when he had got outside, he saw a large open space in front of him, and a path leading out of it.
He went along the path, on and on, till he reached a large house, with a golden door standing open. Inside was a great hall, and in the middle of the hall a throne set with precious stones and a sofa spread with the softest cushions. And he went in and lay down on it, and fell fast asleep, for he had wandered far.
By-and-by there was a sound of people coming through the courtyard, and the measured tramp of soldiers. This was the King of the Snakes coming in state to his palace.
They entered the hall, but all stopped in surprise at finding a man lying on the king's own bed. The soldiers wished to kill him at once, but the king said, "Leave him alone, put me on a chair," and the soldiers who were carrying him knelt on the floor, and he slid from their shoulders on to a chair. When he was comfortably seated, he turned to his soldiers, and bade them wake the stranger gently. And they woke him, and he sat up and saw many snakes all round him, and one of them very beautiful, decked in royal robes.
"Who are you?" asked Hassebu.
"I am the King of the Snakes," was the reply, "and this is my palace. And will you tell me who you are, and where you come from?"
"My name is Hassebu, but whence I come I know not, nor whither I go."
"Then stay for a little with me," said the king, and he bade his soldiers bring water from the spring and fruits from the forest, and to set them before the guest.
For some days Hassebu rested and feasted in the palace of the King of the Snakes, and then he began to long for his mother and his own country. So he said to the King of the Snakes, 'send me home, I pray."
But the King of the Snakes answered, "When you go home, you will do me evil!"
"I will do you no evil," replied Hassebu; 'send me home, I pray."
But the king said, "I know it. If I send you home, you will come back, and kill me. I dare not do it." But Hassebu begged so hard that at last the king said, 'swear that when you get home you will not go to bathe where many people are gathered." And Hassebu swore, and the king ordered his soldiers to take Hassebu in sight of his native city. Then he went straight to his mother's house, and the heart of his mother was glad.
Now the Sultan of the city was very ill, and all the wise men said that the only thing to cure him was the flesh of the King of the Snakes, and that the only man who could get it was a man with a strange mark on his chest. So the Vizir had set people to watch at the public baths, to see if such a man came there.
For three days Hassebu remembered his promise to the King of the Snakes, and did not go near the baths; then came a morning so hot he could hardly breathe, and he forgot all about it.
The moment he had slipped off his robe he was taken before the Vizir, who said to him, "Lead us to the place where the King of the Snakes lives."
"I do not know it!" answered he, but the Vizir did not believe him, and had him bound and beaten till his back was all torn.
Then Hassebu cried, "Loose me, that I may take you."
They went together a long, long way, till they reached the palace of the King of the Snakes.
And Hassebu said to the King: "It was not I: look at my back and you will see how they drove me to it."
"Who has beaten you like this?" asked the King.
"It was the Vizir," replied Hassebu.
"Then I am already dead," said the King sadly, "but you must carry me there yourself."
So Hassebu carried him. And on the way the King said, "When I arrive, I shall be killed, and my flesh will be cooked. But take some of the water that I am boiled in, and put it in a bottle and lay it on one side. The Vizir will tell you to drink it, but be careful not to do so. Then take some more of the water, and drink it, and you will become a great physician, and the third supply you will give to the Sultan. And when the Vizir comes to you and asks, "Did you drink what I gave you?" you must answer, "I did, and this is for you," and he will drink it and die! and your soul will rest."
And they went their way into the town, and all happened as the King of the Snakes had said.
And the Sultan loved Hassebu, who became a great physician, and cured many sick people. But he was always sorry for the poor King of the Snakes.

An old couple once lived in a hut under a grove of palm trees, and they had one son and one daughter. They were all very happy together for many years, and then the father became very ill, and felt he was going to die. He called his children to the place where he lay on the floor–for no one had any beds in that country– and said to his son, "I have no herds of cattle to leave you–only the few things there are in the house–for I am a poor man, as you know. But choose: will you have my blessing or my property?"
"Your property, certainly," answered the son, and his father nodded.
"And you?" asked the old man of the girl, who stood by her brother.
"I will have blessing," she answered, and her father gave her much blessing.
That night he died, and his wife and son and daughter mourned for him seven days, and gave him a burial according to the custom of his people. But hardly was the time of mourning over, than the mother was attacked by a disease which was common in that country.
"I am going away from you," she said to her children, in a faint voice; "but first, my son, choose which you will have: blessing or property."
"Property, certainly," answered the son.
"And you, my daughter?"
"I will have blessing," said the girl; and her mother gave her much blessing, and that night she died.
When the days of mourning were ended, the brother bade his sister put outside the hut all that belonged to his father and his mother. So the girl put them out, and he took them away, save only a small pot and a vessel in which she could clean her corn. But she had no corn to clean.
She sat at home, sad and hungry, when a neighbour knocked at the door.
"My pot has cracked in the fire, lend me yours to cook my supper in, and I will give you a handful of corn in return."
And the girl was glad, and that night she was able to have supper herself, and next day another woman borrowed her pot, and then another and another, for never were known so many accidents as befell the village pots at that time. She soon grew quite fat with all the corn she earned with the help of her pot, and then one evening she picked up a pumpkin seed in a corner, and planted it near her well, and it sprang up, and gave her many pumpkins.
At last it happened that a youth from her village passed through the place where the girl's brother was, and the two met and talked.
"What news is there of my sister?" asked the young man, with whom things had gone badly, for he was idle.
'she is fat and well-liking," replied the youth, "for the women borrow her mortar to clean their corn, and borrow her pot to cook it in, and for al this they give her more food than she can eat." And he went his way.
Now the brother was filled with envy at the words of the man, and he set out at once, and before dawn he had reached the hut, and saw the pot and the mortar were standing outside. He slung them over his shoulders and departed, pleased with his own cleverness; but when his sister awoke and sought for the pot to cook her corn for breakfast, she could find it nowhere. At length she said to herself,
"Well, some thief must have stolen them while I slept. I will go and see if any of my pumpkins are ripe." And indeed they were, and so many that the tree was almost broken by the weight of them. So she ate what she wanted and took the others to the village, and gave them in exchange for corn, and the women said that no pumpkins were as sweet as these, and that she was to bring every day all that she had. In this way she earned more than she needed for herself, and soon was able to get another mortar and cooking pot in exchange for her corn. Then she thought she was quite rich.
Unluckily someone else thought so too, and this was her brother's wife, who had heard all about the pumpkin tree, and sent her slave with a handful of grain to buy her a pumpkin. At first the girl told him that so few were left that she could not spare any; but when she found that he belonged to her brother, she changed her mind, and went out to the tree and gathered the largest and the ripest that was there.
"Take this one," she said to the slave, "and carry it back to your mistress, but tell her to keep the corn, as the pumpkin is a gift."
The brother's wife was overjoyed at the sight of the fruit, and when she tasted it, she declared it was the nicest she had ever eaten. Indeed, all night she thought of nothing else, and early in the morning she called another slave (for she was a rich woman) and bade him go and ask for another pumpkin. But the girl, who had just been out to look at her tree, told him that they were all eaten, so he went back empty-handed to his mistress.
In the evening her husband returned from hunting a long way off, and found his wife in tears.
"What is the matter?" asked he.
"I sent a slave with some grain to your sister to buy some pumpkins, but she would not sell me any, and told me there were none, though I know she lets other people buy them."
"Well, never mind now–go to sleep," said he, "and to-morrow I will go and pull up the pumpkin tree, and that will punish her for treating you so badly."
So before sunrise he got up and set out for his sister's house, and found her cleaning some corn.
"Why did you refuse to sell my wife a pumpkin yesterday when she wanted one?" he asked.
"The old ones are finished, and the new ones are not yet come," answered the girl. "When her slave arrived two days ago, there were only four left; but I gave him one, and would take no corn for it."
"I do not believe you; you have sold them all to other people. I shall go and cut down the pumpkin," cried her brother in a rage.
"If you cut down the pumpkin you shall cut off my hand with it," exclaimed the girl, running up to her tree and catching hold of it. But her brother followed, and with one blow cut off the pumpkin and her hand too.
Then he went into the house and took away everything he could find, and sold the house to a friend of his who had long wished to have it, and his sister had no home to go to.
Meanwhile she had bathed her arm carefully, and bound on it some healing leaves that grew near by, and wrapped a cloth round the leaves, and went to hide in the forest, that her brother might not find her again.
For seven days she wandered about, eating only the fruit that hung from the trees above her, and every night she climbed up and tucked herself safely among the creepers which bound together the big branches, so that neither lions nor tigers nor panthers might get at her.
When she woke up on the seventh morning she saw from her perch smoke coming up from a little town on the edge of the forest. The sight of the huts made her feel more lonely and helpless than before. She longed desperately for a draught of milk from a gourd, for there were no streams in that part, and she was very thirsty, but how was she to earn anything with only one hand? And at this thought her courage failed, and she began to cry bitterly.
It happened that the king's son had come out from the town very early to shoot birds, and when the sun grew hot he left tired.
"I will lie here and rest under this tree," he said to his attendants. "You can go and shoot instead, and I will just have this slave to stay with me!" Away they went, and the young man fell asleep, and slept long. Suddenly he was awakened by something wet and salt falling on his face.
"What is that? Is it raining?" he said to his slave. "Go and look."
"No, master, it is not raining," answered the slave.
"Then climb up the tree and see what it is," and the slave climbed up, and came back and told his master that a beautiful girl was sitting up there, and that it must have been her tears which had fallen on the face of the king's son.
"Why was she crying?" inquired the prince.
"I cannot tell–I did not dare to ask her; but perhaps she would tell you." And the master, greatly wondering, climbed up the tree.
"What is the matter with you?" said he gently, and, as she only sobbed louder, he continued:
"Are you a woman, or a spirit of the woods?"
"I am a woman," she answered slowly, wiping her eyes with a leaf of the creeper that hung about her.
"Then why do you cry?" he persisted.
"I have many things to cry for," she replied, "more than you could ever guess."
"Come home with me," said the prince; "it is not very far. Come home to my father and mother. I am a king's son."
"Then why are you here?" she said, opening her eyes and staring at him.
"Once every month I and my friends shoot birds in the forest," he answered, "but I was tired and bade them leave me to rest. And you–what are you doing up in this tree?"
At that she began to cry again, and told the king's son all that had befallen her since the death of her mother.
"I cannot come down with you, for I do not like anyone to see me," she ended with a sob.
"Oh! I will manage all that," said the king's son, and swinging himself to a lower branch, he bade his slave go quickly into the town, and bring back with him four strong men and a curtained litter. When the man was gone, the girl climbed down, and hid herself on the ground in some bushes. Very soon the slave returned with the litter, which was placed on the ground close to the bushes where the girl lay.
"Now go, all of you, and call my attendants, for I do not wish to say here any longer," he said to the men, and as soon as they were out of sight he bade the girl get into the litter, and fasten the curtains tightly. Then he got in on the other side, and waited till his attendants came up.
"What is the matter, O son of a king?" asked they, breathless with running.
"I think I am ill; I am cold," he said, and signing to the bearers, he drew the curtains, and was carried through the forest right inside his own house.
"Tell my father and mother that I have a fever, and want some gruel," said he, "and bid them send it quickly."
So the slave hastened to the king's palace and gave his message, which troubled both the king and the queen greatly. A pot of hot gruel was instantly prepared, and carried over to the sick man, and as soon as the council which was sitting was over, the king and his ministers went to pay him a visit, bearing a message from the queen that she would follow a little later.
Now the prince had pretended to be ill in order to soften his parent's hearts, and the next day he declared he felt better, and, getting into his litter, was carried to the palace in state, drums being beaten all along the road.
He dismounted at the foot of the steps and walked up, a great parasol being held over his head by a slave. Then he entered the cool, dark room where his father and mother were sitting, and said to them:
"I saw a girl yesterday in the forest whom I wish to marry, and, unknown to my attendants, I brought her back to my house in a litter. Give me your consent, I beg, for no other woman pleases me as well, even though she has but one hand!"
Of course the king and queen would have preferred a daughter-in- law with two hands, and one who could have brought riches with her, but they could not bear to say "No" to their son, so they told him it should be as he chose, and that the wedding feast should be prepared immediately.
The girl could scarcely believe her good fortune, and, in gratitude for all the kindness shown her, was so useful and pleasant to her husband's parents that they soon loved her.
By and bye a baby was born to her, and soon after that the prince was sent on a journey by his father to visit some of the distant towns of the kingdom, and to set right things that had gone wrong.
No sooner had he started than the girl's brother, who had wasted all the riches his wife had brought him in recklessness and folly, and was now very poor, chanced to come into the town, and as he passed he heard a man say, "Do you know that the king's son has married a woman who has lost one of her hands?" On hearing these words the brother stopped and asked, "Where did he find such a woman?"
"In the forest," answered the man, and the cruel brother guessed at once it must be his sister.
A great rage took possession of his soul as he thought of the girl whom he had tried to ruin being after all so much better off than himself, and he vowed that he would work her ill. Therefore that very afternoon he made his way to the palace and asked to see the king.
When he was admitted to his presence, he knelt down and touched the ground with his forehead, and the king bade him stand up and tell wherefore he had come.
"By the kindness of your heart have you been deceived, O king," said he. "Your son has married a girl who has lost a hand. Do you know why she had lost it? She was a witch, and has wedded three husbands, and each husband she has put to death with her arts. Then the people of the town cut off her hand, and turned her into the forest. And what I say is true, for her town is my town also."
The king listened, and his face grew dark. Unluckily he had a hasty temper, and did not stop to reason, and, instead of sending to the town, and discovering people who knew his daughter-in-law and could have told him how hard she had worked and how poor she had been, he believed all the brother's lying words, and made the queen believe them too. Together they took counsel what they should do, and in the end they decided that they also would put her out of the town. But this did not content the brother.
"Kill her," he said. "It is no more than she deserves for daring to marry the king's son. Then she can do no more hurt to anyone."
"We cannot kill her," answered they; "if we did, our son would assuredly kill us. Let us do as the others did, and put her out of the town. And with this the envious brother was forced to be content.
The poor girl loved her husband very much, but just then the baby was more to her than all else in the world, and as long as she had him with her, she did not very much mind anything. So, taking her son on her arm, and hanging a little earthen pot for cooking round her neck, she left her house with its great peacock fans and slaves and seats of ivory, and plunged into the forest.
For a while she walked, not knowing whither she went, then by and bye she grew tired, and sat under a tree to rest and to hush her baby to sleep. Suddenly she raised her eyes, and saw a snake wriggling from under the bushes towards her.
"I am a dead woman," she said to herself, and stayed quite still, for indeed she was too frightened to move. In another minute the snake had reached her side, and to her surprise he spoke.
"Open your earthen pot, and let me go in. Save me from sun, and I will save you from rain," and she opened the pot, and when the snake had slipped in, she put on the cover. Soon she beheld another snake coming after the other one, and when it had reached her it stopped and said, "Did you see a small grey snake pass this way just now?"
"Yes," she answered, "it was going very quickly."
"Ah, I must hurry and catch it up," replied the second snake, and it hastened on.
When it was out of sight, a voice from the pot said:
"Uncover me," and she lifted the lid, and the little grey snake slid rapidly to the ground.
"I am safe now," he said. "But tell me, where are you going?"
"I cannot tell you, for I do not know," she answered. "I am just wandering in the wood."
"Follow me, and let us go home together," said the snake, and the girl followed his through the forest and along the green paths, till they came to a great lake, where they stopped to rest.
"The sun is hot," said the snake, "and you have walked far. Take your baby and bathe in that cool place where the boughs of the tree stretch far over the water."
"Yes, I will," answered she, and they went in. The baby splashed and crowed with delight, and then he gave a spring and fell right in, down, down, down, and his mother could not find him, though she searched all among the reeds.
Full of terror, she made her way back to the bank, and called to the snake, "My baby is gone!–he is drowned, and never shall I see him again."
"Go in once more," said the snake, "and feel everywhere, even among the trees that have their roots in the water, lest perhaps he may be held fast there."
Swiftly she went back and felt everywhere with her whole hand, even putting her fingers into the tiniest crannies, where a crab could hardly have taken shelter.
"No, he is not here," she cried. "How am I to live without him?" But the snake took no notice, and only answered, "Put in your other arm too."
"What is the use of that?" she asked, "when it has no hand to feel with?" but all the same she did as she was bid, and in an instant the wounded arm touched something round and soft, lying between two stones in a clump of reeds.
"My baby, my baby!" she shouted, and lifted him up, merry and laughing, and not a bit hurt or frightened.
"Have you found him this time?" asked the snake.
"Yes, oh, yes!" she answered, "and, why–why–I have got my hand back again!" and from sheer joy she burst into tears.
The snake let her weep for a little while, and then he said–
"Now we will journey on to my family, and we will all repay you for the kindness you showed to me."
"You have done more than enough in giving me back my hand," replied the girl; but the snake only smiled.
"Be quick, lest the sun should set," he answered, and began to wriggle along so fast that the girl could hardly follow him.
By and bye they arrived at the house in a tree where the snake lived, when he was not travelling with his father and mother. And he told them all his adventures, and how he had escaped from his enemy. The father and mother snake could not do enough to show their gratitude. They made their guest lie down on a hammock woven of the strong creepers which hung from bough to bough, till she was quite rested after her wanderings, while they watched the baby and gave him milk to drink from the cocoa-nuts which they persuaded their friends the monkeys to crack for them. They even managed to carry small fruit tied up in their tails for the baby's mother, who felt at last that she was safe and at peace. Not that she forgot her husband, for she often thought of him and longed to show him her son, and in the night she would sometimes lie awake and wonder where he was.
In this manner many weeks passed by.
And what was the prince doing?
Well, he had fallen very ill when he was on the furthest border of the kingdom, and he was nursed by some kind people who did not know who he was, so that the king and queen heard nothing about him. When he was better he made his way home again, and into his father's palace, where he found a strange man standing behind the throne with the peacock's feathers. This was his wife's brother, whom the king had taken into high favour, though, of course, the prince was quite ignorant of what had happened.
For a moment the king and queen stared at their son, as if he had been unknown to them; he had grown so thin and weak during his illness that his shoulders were bowed like those of an old man.
"Have you forgotten me so soon?" he asked.
At the sound of his voice they gave a cry and ran towards him, and poured out questions as to what had happened, and why he looked like that. But the prince did not answer any of them.
"How is my wife?" he said. There was a pause.
Then the queen replied:
'she is dead."
"Dead!" he repeated, stepping a little backwards. "And my child?"
"He is dead too."
The young man stood silent. Then he said, 'show me their graves."
At these words the king, who had been feeling rather uncomfortable, took heart again, for had he not prepared two beautiful tombs for his son to see, so that he might never, never guess what had been done to his wife? All these months the king and queen had been telling each other how good and merciful they had been not to take her brother's advice and to put her to death. But now, this somehow did not seem so certain.
Then the king led the way to the courtyard just behind the palace, and through the gate into a beautiful garden where stood two splendid tombs in a green space under the trees. The prince advanced alone, and, resting his head against the stone, he burst into tears. His father and mother stood silently behind with a curious pang in their souls which they did not quite understand. Could it be that they were ashamed of themselves?
But after a while the prince turned round, and walking past them in to the palace he bade the slaves bring him mourning. For seven days no one saw him, but at the end of them he went out hunting, and helped his father rule his people. Only no one dared to speak to him of his wife and son.
At last one morning, after the girl had been lying awake all night thinking of her husband, she said to her friend the snake:
"You have all shown me much kindness, but now I am well again, and want to go home and hear some news of my husband, and if he still mourns for me!" Now the heart of the snake was sad at her words, but he only said:
"Yes, thus it must be; go and bid farewell to my father and mother, but if they offer you a present, see that you take nothing but my father's ring and my mother's casket."
So she went to the parent snakes, who wept bitterly at the thought of losing her, and offered her gold and jewels as much as she could carry in remembrance of them. But the girl shook her head and pushed the shining heap away from her.
"I shall never forget you, never," she said in a broken voice, "but the only tokens I will accept from you are that little ring and this old casket."
The two snakes looked at each other in dismay. The ring and the casket were the only things they did not want her to have. Then after a short pause they spoke.
"Why do you want the ring and casket so much? Who has told you of them?"
"Oh, nobody; it is just my fancy," answered she. But the old snakes shook their heads and replied:
"Not so; it is our son who told you, and, as he said, so it must be. If you need food, or clothes, or a house, tell the ring and it will find them for you. And if you are unhappy or in danger, tell the casket and it will set things right." Then they both gave her their blessing, and she picked up her baby and went her way.
She walked for a long time, till at length she came near the town where her husband and his father dwelt. Here she stopped under a grove of palm trees, and told the ring that she wanted a house.
"It is ready, mistress," whispered a queer little voice which made her jump, and, looking behind her, she saw a lovely palace made of the finest woods, and a row of slaves with tall fans bowing before the door. Glad indeed was she to enter, for she was very tired, and, after eating a good supper of fruit and milk which she found in one of the rooms, she flung herself down on a pile of cushions and went to sleep with her baby beside her.
Here she stayed quietly, and every day the baby grew taller and stronger, and very soon he could run about and even talk. Of course the neighbours had a great deal to say about the house which had been built so quickly–so very quickly–on the outskirts of the town, and invented all kinds of stories about the rich lady who lived in it. And by and bye, when the king returned with his son from the wars, some of these tales reached his ears.
"It is really very odd about that house under the palms," he said to the queen; "I must find out something of the lady whom no one ever sees. I daresay it is not a lady at all, but a gang of conspirators who want to get possession of my throne. To-morrow I shall take my son and my chief ministers and insist on getting inside."
Soon after sunrise next day the prince's wife was standing on a little hill behind the house, when she saw a cloud of dust coming through the town. A moment afterwards she heard faintly the roll of the drums that announced the king's presence, and saw a crowd of people approaching the grove of palms. Her heart beat fast. Could her husband be among them? In any case they must not discover her there; so just bidding the ring prepare some food for them, she ran inside, and bound a veil of golden gauze round her head and face. Then, taking the child's hand, she went to the door and waited.
In a few minutes the whole procession came up, and she stepped forward and begged them to come in and rest.
"Willingly," answered the king; "go first, and we will follow you."
They followed her into a long dark room, in which was a table covered with gold cups and baskets filled with dates and cocoa- nuts and all kinds of ripe yellow fruits, and the king and the prince sat upon cushions and were served by slaves, while the ministers, among whom she recognised her own brother, stood behind.
"Ah, I owe all my misery to him," she said to herself. "From the first he has hated me," but outwardly she showed nothing. And when the king asked her what news there was in the town she only answered:
"You have ridden far; eat first, and drink, for you must be hungry and thirsty, and then I will tell you my news."
"You speak sense," answered the king, and silence prevailed for some time longer. Then he said:
"Now, lady, I have finished, and am refreshed, therefore tell me, I pray you, who you are, and whence you come? But, first, be seated."
She bowed her head and sat down on a big scarlet cushion, drawing her little boy, who was asleep in a corner, on to her knee, and began to tell the story of her life. As her brother listened, he would fain have left the house and hidden himself in the forest, but it was his duty to wave the fan of peacock's feathers over the king's head to keep off the flies, and he knew he would be seized by the royal guards if he tried to desert his post. He must stay where he was, there was no help for it, and luckily for him the king was too much interested in the tale to notice that the fan had ceased moving, and that flies were dancing right on the top of his thick curly hair.
The story went on, but the story-teller never once looked at the prince, even through her veil, though he on his side never moved his eyes from her. When she reached the part where she had sat weeping in the tree, the king's son could restrain himself no longer.
"It is my wife," he cried, springing to where she sat with the sleeping child in her lap. "They have lied to me, and you are not dead after all, nor the boy either.! But what has happened? Why did they lie to me? and why did you leave my house where you were safe?" And he turned and looked fiercely at his father.
"Let me finish my tale first, and then you will know," answered she, throwing back her veil, and she told how her brother had come to the palace and accused her of being a witch, and had tried to persuade the king to slay her. "But he would not do that," she continued softly, "and after all, if I had stayed on in your house, I should never have met the snake, nor have got my hand back again. So let us forget all about it, and be happy once more, for see! our son is growing quite a big boy."
"And what shall be done to your brother?" asked the king, who was glad to think that someone had acted in this matter worse than himself.
"Put him out of the town," answered she.

The Hedgehog and the Dog were formerly good friends, and cultivated bananas together. When the bananas were full-grown, the Hedgehog used to go to look at them every day, and when at last they were ripe he invited the Dog to go with him and eat them. When the two friends reached the foot of the banana tree, the Hedgehog tried in vain to reach the bunches of bananas. The Dog, meanwhile, standing on his hind legs, could easily reach up and pluck the fruit. He found them so good that he did not stop until he had eaten all the bananas, without giving a single one to the Hedgehog, regardless of his entreaties.
When the Dog had eaten the last banana the Hedgehog said: "Now let us play a game that I often play with my brothers. You must take a bamboo and sharpen it at both ends; and when it is sharp you must stick it into the ground at the foot of the tree, and then climb the tree and jump down on the stick. The Dog was willing to play this game, and when all was ready he invited the Hedgehog to jump first, and even helped him up the tree, since his friend could not climb alone. The Hedgehog jumped first, straight down onto the bamboo stick,—but thanks to his stiff quills, he was not hurt. Then came the turn of the Dog, and he jumped, and was transfixed by the sharp bamboo. As the Hedgehog departed he called over his shoulder, "Ask your banana skins to help you!"

A pair of Wrens once built their nest in a hedge beside a highway. Soon after the eggs were hatched, a Camel happened to pass that way. The little Wrens saw him, and said to the father bird, when he returned from the fields:
"Oh, papa, a monstrous big animal came by here just now."
The wren stretched out one leg: "As big as that, my children?"
"Oh, papa, much bigger than that!"
The Wren stretched out a leg and a wing: "As big as that, my children?"
"Oh, papa, much bigger."
Finally the Wren spread out both wings and legs: "As big as that, then?"
"Oh, yes, much bigger!"
"That is impossible, my children, for there is no animal bigger than I!"
"Just you wait and you will see for yourself," said the little Wrens.
Presently the Camel came back, browsing along the hedge. The Wren was perched beside his nest; and the Camel, biting off a bunch of leaves, and not seeing the bird, took him in with them. The Wren, however, flew out safe and sound between the Camel's big teeth, and hurried back to his children.
"You are quite right," he said. "The Camel is a monstrous big animal. But I am pretty well satisfied with myself, just the same."

Once upon a time the Lion was roaming through the jungle like a mighty chief on his own land. He looked to the right; he looked to the left; he took two steps forward, then stopped, then went forward again. All at once an Ape saw the Lion and began imitating him and making fun of him. The Lion was angry and said:
"Get back to your place, Ape, and scratch yourself, and stop making fun of me or I will make a meal of you."
But the Ape, who is a tricky animal, swung safely onto a high branch, and there continued to make the same movements and take the same steps that the Lion was taking on the ground. And at this the Lion became very angry indeed.
Unluckily for the Ape at the very height of his grimaces and gambols he lost his balance and fell straight between the paws of the Lion, who seized him and was about to make an end of him with one powerful bite, when the idea came to him that it would be pleasanter to eat the Ape in company with a friend. Accordingly he flung his captive into a small cave, the mouth of which he closed with a large stone. After which he set out in search of a fellow-diner.
Once more alone and somewhat recovered from his fright, the Ape's first thought was, "How am I to get away?" So he set to work at the mouth of the cave; but the stone was too heavy to push aside, and too tight a fit for the Ape to squeeze past it. All his efforts were wasted and he was in despair.
All of a sudden, a Wolf chanced to pass that way and heard the Ape howling desperately. The Wolf had lately quarrelled with the Ape and still owed him a grudge, so it pleased him to hear the Ape howling, and he asked, "Why are you making such an outcry?"
The Ape, who was quick-witted, saw that if he failed to trick the Wolf, he had lost his last chance, so he replied, "I am not crying, I am singing."
"Why are you singing?" asked the Wolf.
"To help my digestion, while I am waiting for the Rabbit, who has gone to get some more meat. This morning he and I arranged for a feast together, and we are to continue it all night. We have so much food here that I can eat no more; my stomach is too small. There are heaps of leavings all around me."
The Wolf, who is a born glutton, asked coaxingly, "You wouldn't refuse an old friend like me a share in the feast, would you?"
"No, indeed," answered the Ape, "Come right on into the Rabbit's hole, there is plenty of food for one more. But for fear any others should see us feasting, be careful to make no noise in rolling away the stone that closes the doorway." The Wolf obeyed, and the moment he rolled aside the stone and started to enter the cave, the Ape slipped between his legs and shoved back the stone, leaving the Wolf a prisoner.
Meanwhile the Lion arrived accompanied by his hungry friend. "Well, well!" said he, "So the Ape got out of the cave, after all! Never mind, we will eat the Wolf instead." And while they made their dinner off the Wolf, the clever Ape was dancing and gambolling in the tree-top, overjoyed at his success in tricking both of his enemies.

A boar, hunting for food, met a Chameleon at the foot of a tree. "Hello!" said the Boar, "you act as though you were half dead, dragging yourself along in that lazy way!"
"Don't be so proud of your strength, brother Boar," retorted the Chameleon, "I am a match for you any day!"
"Hold your tongue, you wretched little beast!" rejoined the Boar angrily. "If you think so well of yourself, will you run a race with me."
"Of course I will," agreed the Chameleon readily. "Do you see that little hill over there? Let that be the goal."
"All right," said the Boar, and at once started to run. But the tricky little Chameleon caught hold of the Boar's tail. When the hill was reached, the Boar said, "Well, Chameleon, where are you now?"
"Here I am," said the Chameleon, who had been quick to let go of the Boar's tail and drop to earth.
"Well, you run faster than I thought you could," said the Boar.
"Let's try again. This time I won't let myself be beaten!" So they ran again and the Chameleon repeated his trick and for the second time reached the goal at the same time as his enemy.
"Haha! haha! Where are you this time, little brother?" called the Boar gleefully.
"Here I am, big brother!" shouted back the tricky little Chameleon. And so the Boar, puzzled and ashamed, had to admit that the Chameleon had won the race.

In the old days the Guinea-hen and the Crocodile were good friends and swam in the same waters. But one day the Crocodile said to his children, "I have eaten the flesh of all the animals on earth, excepting only that of the Guinea-hen. Now I am going to do my best to eat that also." So the Crocodile pretended to be dead, and said to his children, "Gather together and weep, and send for the Guinea-hen."
So the little Crocodiles went to the Guinea-hen and said to her: "Guinea-hen, our father, Ramamba, the Crocodile, is dead, and we have come to tell you, because you were his oldest friend."
Then the Guinea-hen gathered together all her family and said, "Oh, my children and my grandchildren, gather together, for we are going to the funeral of the old Crocodile, Ramamba."
When all the little Guinea-fowls had come together, the old Guinea-hen said, "The Crocodile wants to eat Guinea-fowls. When we go to the funeral, be sure not to go near him until you see me go near him, and don't sing until I tell you to."
Then all the family of Guinea-fowls set out for the funeral of the Crocodile. And the little Guinea-fowls and the little Crocodiles all greeted each other properly. Then the mother Guinea-hen said to the little Crocodiles, "Have you yet held the funeral of your father, Ramamba?"
"Not yet," answered the little Crocodiles. "We are still children, and we do not know the proper way to hold a funeral. That is why we sent for you and have waited until you came." Then the Guinea-hen said, "Sing, my children, while I talk to the Crocodile." Then she turned to where the wily old Crocodile lay, stiff and silent as though he were dead, and asked him:
"Is it true, Ramamba, that you are dead? If it is true, move your feet, so that your children and grandchildren can see and can tell themselves, 'Ramamba is dead, and we must recite his great deeds. For he is now famous among dead heroes, and many are his deeds that must be told.'"
Ramamba, at this, moved his feet. Then all the little Guinea-chicks sang in chorus, "Mbitra! Mbitra!" and the mother Guinea-hen said:
"Ramamba, you have moved your feet! You, who are dead, nevertheless still move. Since you are really dead, Ramamba, open your jaws, and your children and grandchildren shall sing your praise." The Crocodile opened his jaws, and all the little Guinea-chicks again began singing, "Mbitra!"
"Ramamba," began the Guinea-hen again, "if you are really dead, open your eyes!" The Crocodile opened his eyes, looked at the Guinea-hen and said to himself, "To-day I shall certainly taste the flesh of a Guinea-hen!"
"Turn over on your other side," commanded the Guinea-hen, and Ramamba turned over. Then all the little Guinea-chicks ran together in a bunch and sang in chorus, "Ramamba meant to eat us all, but he shall never taste our flesh!"
"Our plans have all failed," said the Crocodile to his children, "we shall not have the feast we hoped for. But may my curse rest upon any one of my descendants who fails to eat a Guinea-fowl if he gets the chance!"
And for her part the Guinea-hen said, "If ever my children or grandchildren go into the water, may they be eaten by the Crocodile! When they must bathe, let them bathe in the dust, and when they would drink let them quench their thirst in the evening dew!"
That is why the Guinea-fowl never goes into the water; and that is why the Guinea-hen and the Crocodile are no longer friends.

One day when there was no rice left in the rice-fields, the Guinea-Fowl and the Hen stole potatoes to satisfy their hunger. They lighted a fire, and when the potatoes were roasted, the Hen said:
"I am going to carry the largest potatoes home with me, and eat only the little ones here in the field."
"And I," said the Guinea-Fowl, "shall be wiser than you. For I shall begin by eating all my biggest potatoes. So if the owner of the field finds us here, I can leave the small ones and fly away."
"The owner? The owner?" said the Hen, "I am not afraid of him! If the owner comes, I shall fly off too, and take my big potatoes with me!"
Thereupon the two friends settled down to their feast of potatoes. The Hen, according to her plan, picked out only the little ones, while the Guinea-Fowl chose only the largest. Presently the owner of the field passed that way and, discovering the two thieves, gave chase to them. The Guinea-Fowl at once took to flight, deserting her friend, the Hen. The latter, loaded down with her big potatoes, fell an easy prey to the farmer, who caught and took her home with him. That is how the Hen was domesticated by Man, while the Guinea-Fowl still runs wild.

One day a Cat and a Rat wished to cross a river but were daunted by its width and the strength of its current. The Rat alone knew how to swim, and both were afraid of the Crocodiles. As for hiring a canoe, they could not think of such a thing, for they would have had to hire a canoe from some Man, and they were afraid of Men. At last they decided to make a canoe for themselves cut out of a large potato. While the Cat held the potato between her paws, the Rat hollowed it out with his teeth which were sharp as hatchets. When the canoe was finished they pushed it into the water and both stepped in. The Rat paddled because he was the younger. But after a while he grew tired and threw down the paddle; for it seemed as though the other side of the river was still a day's journey off.
"I am very hungry," said the Rat.
"Hungry? So am I," said the Cat.
"I am going to gnaw our canoe a little," said the Rat. "It is my natural food. Why should I go hungry while there is food within reach?" And he began to gnaw the potato.
"Have a care," said the Cat, "for if you gnaw too deep and wreck our canoe, you shall die with me."
The Rat promised not to gnaw the potato any more. But presently he quietly began again, and gnawed a little every time the Cat's head was turned; and whenever the Cat looked his way he hid with his body the hole that he had gnawed. At last the bottom of the canoe was gnawed so thin that it gave way, and began to fill with water. Instantly the Rat jumped into the river and swam to shore, escaping the Crocodiles. When he was safe on land he began laughing at the Cat as he watched her struggle and splutter the water from her nose. "If you go to the bottom," he called out, "give my regards to the fishes!"
The Cat was so angry that she felt that she would rather have drowned than live to be laughed at like that. In her rage she managed to struggle ashore, and before the Rat could make his escape, she pounced upon him, and seized him by the head.
"Mercy, Mercy!" cried the Rat! "If you must eat me, begin at my tail," for he wanted to see the light of day as long as possible.
"Don't bother me," said the Cat, and she promptly ate him up.
And to this day it is a common saying in Madagascar. "Don't bother me, said the Cat."

Once upon a time the Elephant and the Frog went courting the same girl, and at last she promised to marry the Elephant. One day the Frog said to her,
"That Elephant is nothing but my saddle horse."
When the Elephant came to call that night the girl said to him: "You are nothing but the Frog's saddle horse!"
When he heard this the Elephant went off at once and found the Frog, and asked him:
"Did you tell the girl that I am nothing but your saddle horse?"
"Oh, no indeed," said the Frog, "I never told her that!"
Thereupon they both started back together to see the girl. On the way the Frog said:
"Grandpa Elephant, I am too tired to walk any further. Let me climb up on your back."
"Certainly," said the Elephant, "Climb up, my grandson." So the Frog climbed up on the Elephant's back. Presently he said:
"Grandpa Elephant, I am afraid that I am going to fall off. Let me take some little cords and fasten them to your tusks, to hold on by."
"Certainly, my grandson," said the Elephant; and he stood still while the Frog did as he had asked. Presently the Frog spoke again:
"Grandpa Elephant, please stop and let me pick a green branch so that I can keep the flies off of you."
"Certainly, my grandson," said the Elephant, and he stood quite still while the Frog broke off the branch. Pretty soon they drew near to the house where the girl lived. And when she saw them coming, the Elephant plodding patiently along with the little Frog perched on his broad back, holding the cords in one hand, and waving the green branch she came to meet them, calling out,
"Mr. Elephant, you certainly are nothing but the Frog's saddle horse!"

One year, during flood-time, when all the rivers overflowed their banks, a Crocodile was carried a long way from his own river, and landed so deep in the jungle that he could not find his way back to water. For many days he had nothing to drink or to eat, and so grew very thin. At last a hunter, looking for deer, met the Crocodile and asked:
"What are you doing here?"
The Crocodile told his story, and the hunter said: "If you will promise not to hurt me, I will carry you back to your river."
The Crocodile promised; and the Hunter bound him with cord, put him on his head, and carried him back to the bank of the river. Then the Crocodile said:
"Since you have brought me as far as this, you may as well carry me down into the water." So the Hunter, still carrying the Crocodile, waded into the river up to his knees.
"As a favour go a little further," begged the Crocodile. So the Hunter went further, until the water was up to his breast.
"A little further still," begged the Crocodile, and he went on until the water was up to his neck. Then he unbound the cords and placed the Crocodile in the water, saying: "There now, are you satisfied?"
"Not yet," answered the Crocodile. "Not until I have eaten you," and he seized the unhappy Hunter, and held him tight.
"Is this my reward for bringing you so far, and saving your life?" asked the Hunter.
"I shall not eat you until we find some one who shall judge between us," answered the Crocodile.
Presently a Horse came down to the river to drink. The Crocodile said: "Don't drink until you have judged between us," and then told the Horse the facts of the case. The Horse replied:
"You should eat him, for a Man is a wicked creature. Ever since I was a colt, Men have mounted me, driven me, travelled on my back and maltreated me. Now that I am old, they no longer take the trouble to feed me."
The Crocodile said: "Let us find a second judge."
Next came a Cow: and when the case was stated to her, she said: "Eat the Man! Men milk me, drink my milk, and then neglect me because I am old!" A Donkey next passed by and, being appealed to, said: "Eat the Man, and quickly! Men have always worked me hard, abused and half starved me! Now they desert me because I am old."
Last of all came a Rabbit. When asked for his judgment he said to the Crocodile: "How could a Man bring you here, a big creature like you?"
"All the same, he did it," answered the Crocodile.
"How did he do it?" asked the Rabbit.
"By binding me with cord, and carrying me through the jungle on his head."
The Rabbit told the Hunter to take the cord and show how he had bound the Crocodile. When this was done, the Hunter took the Crocodile once more on his head, and carried him back to the jungle where he had first found him. Then the Rabbit asked the Hunter: "Do you eat Crocodiles?"
"Yes," answered the Hunter.
"Then eat him, and quickly," advised the Rabbit. "Since the Crocodile intended to do you harm."

The rat one day said to the toad: "I can do more than you; for you do not know how to run. You do nothing but hop—that is the only way you can run!"
When the toad heard these words of the rat, he said to him: "We will see whether you can do more than I. To-morrow I will do thing; if you can do it without anything happening to you, then I will admit that you can do more than I."
The rat agreed to the toad's proposal.
The next day the toad waited until noon, when the sun was overhead and all the workmen went to sit down in the shade of a tree to eat their luncheon. Then he hopped over to the men and passed in and out among them.
"See that toad!" said one of the men; but no one wanted to touch him.
Then the toad hopped back to the rat.
"You saw what I did," said he. "Now you do the same."
The rat laughed at such a simple task, and ran at once across to the tree where the men were sitting in the shade.
But when the men saw him they exclaimed, "Here is a rat!" and they grabbed up sticks and tried to kill him. The poor rat barely managed to escape, and ran back, all bruised and sore, to where the toad was waiting.
"Brother Toad," said he, "I thought that I could do more than you; but you have shown me that you can indeed do more than I!"
No one can excel in every way.

The ant has had from time immemorial many enemies, and because he is small and destructive, there have been a great many slaughters among them. Not only were most of the birds their enemies, but Anteater lived almost wholly from them, and Centipede beset them every time and at all places when he had the chance.
So now there were a few among them who thought it would be well to hold council together and see if they could not come to some arrangement whereby they could retreat to some place of safety when attacked by robber birds and animals.
But at the gathering their opinions were most discordant, and they could come to no decision.
There was Red-ant, Rice-ant, Black-ant, Wagtail-ant, Gray-ant, Shining-ant, and many other varieties. The discussion was a true babel of diversity, which continued for a long time and came to nothing.
A part desired that they should all go into a small hole in the ground, and live there; another part wanted to have a large and strong dwelling built on the ground, where nobody could enter but an ant; still another wanted to dwell in trees, so as to get rid of Anteater, forgetting entirely that there they would be the prey of birds; another part seemed inclined to have wings and fly.
And, as has already been said, this deliberation amounted to nothing, and each party resolved to go to work in its own way, and on its own responsibility.
Greater unity than that which existed in each separate faction could be seen nowhere in the world; each had his appointed task, each did his work regularly and well. And all worked together in the same way. From among them they chose a king-that is to say some of the groups did-and they divided the labor so that all went as smoothly as it possibly could.
But each group did it in its own way, and not one of them thought of protecting themselves against the onslaught of birds or Anteater.
The Red-ants built their house on the ground and lived under it, but Anteater leveled to the ground in a minute what had cost them many days of precious labor. The Rice-ants lived under the ground, and with them it went no better. For whenever they came out, Anteater visited them and took them out sack and pack. The Wagtail-ants fled to the trees, but there on many occasions sat Centipede waiting for them, or the birds gobbled them up. The Gray-ants had intended to save themselves from extermination by taking to flight, but this also availed them nothing, because the Lizard, the Hunting-spider, and the birds went a great deal faster than they.
When the Insect-king heard that they could come to no agreement he sent them the secret of unity, and the message of Work-together. But unfortunately he chose for his messenger the Beetle, and he has never yet arrived at the Ants, so that they are still to-day the embodiment of discord and consequently the prey of enemies.

Hunger and want forced Monkey one day to forsake his land and to seek elsewhere among strangers for much-needed work. Bulbs, earth beans, scorpions, insects, and such things were completely exhausted in his own land. But fortunately he received, for the time being, shelter with a great uncle of his, Orang Outang, who lived in another part of the country.
When he had worked for quite a while he wanted to return home, and as recompense his great uncle gave him a fiddle and a bow and arrow and told him that with the bow and arrow he could hit and kill anything he desired, and with the fiddle he could force anything to dance.
The first he met upon his return to his own land was Brer Wolf. This old fellow told him all the news and also that he had since early morning been attempting to stalk a deer, but all in vain.
Then Monkey laid before him all the wonders of the bow and arrow that he carried on his back and assured him if he could but see the deer he would bring it down for him. When Wolf showed him the deer, Monkey was ready and down fell the deer.
They made a good meal together, but instead of Wolf being thankful, jealousy overmastered him and he begged for the bow and arrow. When Monkey refused to give it to him, he thereupon began to threaten him with his greater strength, and so when Jackal passed by, Wolf told him that Monkey had stolen his bow and arrow. After Jackal had heard both of them, he declared himself unqualified to settle the case alone, and he proposed that they bring the matter to the court of Lion, Tiger, and the other animals. In the meantime he declared he would take possession of what had been the cause of their quarrel, so that it would be safe, as he said. But he immediately brought to earth all that was eatable, so there was a long time of slaughter before Monkey and Wolf agreed to have the affair in court.
Monkey's evidence was weak, and to make it worse, Jackal's testimony was against him. Jackal thought that in this way it would be easier to obtain the bow and arrow from Wolf for himself.
And so fell the sentence against Monkey. Theft was looked upon as a great wrong; he must hang.
The fiddle was still at his side, and he received as a last favor from the court the right to play a tune on it.
He was a master player of his time, and in addition to this came the wonderful power of his charmed fiddle. Thus, when he struck the first note of "Cockcrow" upon it, the court began at once to show an unusual and spontaneous liveliness, and before he came to the first waltzing turn of the old tune the whole court was dancing like a whirlwind.
Over and over, quicker and quicker, sounded the tune of "Cockcrow" on the charmed fiddle, until some of the dancers, exhausted, fell down, although still keeping their feet in motion. But Monkey, musician as he was, heard and saw nothing of what had happened around him. With his head placed lovingly against the instrument, and his eyes half closed, he played on, keeping time ever with his foot.
Wolf was the first to cry out in pleading tones breathlessly, "Please stop, Cousin Monkey! For love's sake, please stop!"
But Monkey did not even hear him. Over and over sounded the resistless waltz of "Cockcrow."
After a while Lion showed signs of fatigue, and when he had gone the round once more with his young lion wife, he growled as he passed Monkey, "My whole kingdom is yours, ape, if you just stop playing."
"I do not want it," answered Monkey, "but withdraw the sentence and give me my bow and arrow, and you, Wolf, acknowledge that you stole it from me."
"I acknowledge, I acknowledge!" cried Wolf, while Lion cried, at the same instant, that he withdrew the sentence.
Monkey gave them just a few more turns of the "Cockcrow," gathered up his bow and arrow, and seated himself high up in the nearest camel thorn tree.
The court and other animals were so afraid that he might begin again that they hastily disbanded to new parts of the world.

Tiger (leopard) was returning home from hunting on one occasion, when he lighted on the kraal of Ram. Now, Tiger had never seen Ram before, and accordingly, approaching submissively, he said, "Good day, friend! What may your name be?"
The other in his gruff voice, and striking his breast with his forefoot, said, "I am Ram. Who are you?"
"Tiger," answered the other, more dead than alive, and then, taking leave of Ram, he ran home as fast as he could.
Jackal lived at the same place as Tiger did, and the latter going to him, said, "Friend Jackal, I am quite out of breath, and am half dead with fright, for I have just seen a terrible looking fellow, with a large and thick head, and on my asking him what his name was, he answered, "I am Ram."
"What a foolish fellow you are," cried Jackal, "to let such a nice piece of flesh stand! Why did you do so? But we shall go to-morrow and eat it together."
Next day the two set off for the kraal of Ram, and as they appeared over a hill, Ram, who had turned out to look about him, and was calculating where he should that day crop a tender salad, saw them, and he immediately went to his wife and said, "I fear this is our last day, for Jackal and Tiger are both coming against us. What shall we do?"
"Don't be afraid," said the wife, "but take up the child in your arms, go out with it, and pinch it to make it cry as if it were hungry." Ram did so as the confederates came on.
No sooner did Tiger cast his eyes on Ram than fear again took possession of him, and he wished to turn back. Jackal had provided against this, and made Tiger fast to himself with a leathern thong, and said, "Come on," when Ram cried in a loud voice, and pinching his child at the same time, "You have done well, Friend Jackal, to have brought us Tiger to eat, for you hear how my child is crying for food."
On these dreadful words Tiger, notwithstanding the entreaties of Jackal to let him go, to let him loose, set off in the greatest alarm, dragayed Jackal after him over hill and valley, through bushes and over rocks, and never stopped to look behind him till he brought back himself and half-dead Jackal to his place again. And so Ram escaped.

Once on a time Jackal, who lived on the borders of the colony, saw a wagon returning from the seaside laden with fish; he tried to get into the wagon from behind, but he could not; he then ran on before and lay in the road as if dead. The wagon came up to him, and the leader cried to the driver, "Here is a fine kaross for your wife!"
"Throw it into the wagon," said the driver, and Jackal was thrown in.
The wagon traveled on, through a moonlight night, and all the while Jackal was throwing out the flsh into the road; he then jumped out himself and secured a great prize. But stupid old Wolf (hyena), coming by, ate more than his share, for which Jackal owed him a grudge, and he said to him, " You can get plenty of fish, too, if you lie in the way of a wagon as I did, and keep quite still whatever happens."
"So!" mumbled Wolf.
Accordingly, when the next wagon came from the sea, Wolf stretched himself out in the road.
"What ugly thing is this?" cried the leader, and kicked Wolf. He then took a stick and thrashed him within an inch of his life. Wolf, according to the directions of Jackal, lay quiet as long as he could; he then got up and bobbled off to tell his misfortune to Jackal, who pretended to comfort him.
"What a pity," said Wolf, "I have not got such a handsome skin as you have!"

Jackal and Wolf went and hired themselves to a man to be his servants. In the middle of the night Jackal rose and smeared Wolf's tail with some fat, and then ate all the rest of it in the house. In the morning the man missed the fat, and he immediately accused Jackal of having eaten it. "Look at Wolf's tale," said the rogue, "and you will see who is the thief." The man did so, and then thrashed Wolf till he was nearly dead.

It so happened one day that Lion and Jackal came together to converse on affairs of land and state. Jackal, let me say, was the most important adviser to the king of the forest, and after they had spoken about these matters for quite a while, the conversation took a more personal turn.
Lion began to boast and talk big about his strength. Jackal had, perhaps, given him cause for it, because by nature he was a flatterer. But now that Lion began to assume so many airs, said he, "See here, Lion, I will show you an animal that is still more powerful than you are."
They walked along, Jackal leading the way, and met first a little boy.
"Is this the strong man?" asked Lion.
"No," answered Jackal, "he must still become a man, O king."
After a while they found an old man walking with bowed head and supporting his bent figure with a stick.
"Is this the wonderful strong man?" asked Lion.
"Not yet, O king," was Jackal's answer, "he has been a man."
Continuing their walk a short distance farther, they came across a young hunter, in the prime of youth, and accompanied by some of his dogs.
"There you have him now, O king," said Jackal. "Pit your strength against his, and if you win, then truly you are the strength of the earth."
Then Jackal made tracks to one side toward a little rocky kopje from which he would be able to see the meeting.
Growling, growling, Lion strode forward to meet the man, but when he came close the dogs beset him. He, however, paid but little attention to the dogs, pushed and separated them on all sides with a few sweeps of his front paws. They bowled aloud, beating a hasty retreat toward the man.
Thereupon the man fired a charge of shot, biting him behind the shoulder, but even to this Lion paid but little attention. Thereupon the hunter pulled out his steel knife, and gave him a few good jabs. Lion retreated, followed by the flying bullets of the hunter.
"Well, are you strongest now?" was Jackal's first question when Lion arrived at his side.
"No, Jackal," answered Lion, "let that fellow there keep the name and welcome. Such as he I have never before seen. In the first place he had about ten of his bodyguard storm me. I really did not bother myself much about them, but when I attempted to turn him to chaff, he spat and blew fire at me, mostly into my face, that burned just a little but not very badly. And when I again endeavored to pull him to the ground he jerked out from his body one of his ribs with which he gave me some very ugly wounds, so bad that I had to make chips fly, and as a parting he sent some warm bullets after me. No, Jackal, give him the name."

Once there was a man that had an old dog, so old that the, man desired to put him aside. The dog had served him very faithfully when he was still young, but ingratitude is the world's reward, and the man now wanted to dispose of him. The old dumb creature, however, ferreted out the plan of his master, and so at once resolved to go away of his own accord.
After he had walked quite a way he met an old bull in the veldt.
"Don't you want to go with me?" asked the dog.
"Where?" was the reply.
"To the land of the aged," said the dog, where troubles don't disturb you and thanklessness does not deface the deeds of man."
"Good," said the bull, "I am your companion."
The two now walked on and found a ram.
The dog laid the plan before him, and all moved off together, until they afterwards came successively upon a donkey, a cat, a cock, and a goose.
These joined their company, and the seven set out on their journey.
Late one night they came to a house and through the open door they saw a table spread with all kinds of nice food, of which some robbers were having their fill. It would help nothing to ask for admittance, and seeing that they were hungry, they must think of something else.
Therefore the donkey climbed up on the bull, the rain. on the donkey, the dog on the rain, the cat on the dog, the goose on the cat, and the cock on the goose, and with one accord they all let out terrible (threatening) noises (cryings).
The bull began to bellow, the donkey to bray, the dog to bark, the ram to bleat, the cat to mew, the goose to giggle gaggle, and the cock to crow, all without cessation.
The people in the house were frightened perfectly limp; they glanced out through the front door, and there they stared on the strange sight. Some of them took to the ropes over the back lower door, some disappeared through the window, and in a few counts the house was empty.
Then the seven old animals climbed down from one another, stepped into the house, and satisfied themselves with the delicious food.
But when they had finished, there still remained a great deal of food, too much to take with them on their remaining journey, and so together they contrived a plan to hold their position until the next day after breakfast.
The dog said, "See here, I am accustomed to watch at the front door of my master's house," and thereupon flopped himself down to sleep; the bull said, "I go behind the door," and there he took his position; the ram said, "I will go up on to the loft"; the donkey, "I at the middle door"; the cat, "I in the fireplace"; the goose, "I in the back door"; and the cock said, "I am going to sleep on the bed."
The captain of the robbers after a while sent one of his men back to see if these creatures had yet left the house.
The man came very cautiously into the neighborhood, listened and listened, but he heard nothing; he peeped through the window, and saw in the grate just two coals still glimmering, and thereupon started to walk through the front door.
There the old dog seized him by the leg. He jumped into the house, but the bull was ready, swept him up with his horns, and tossed him on to the loft. Here the ram received him and pushed him off the loft again. Reaching ground, he made for the middle door, but the donkey set up a terrible braying and at the same time gave him a kick that landed him in the fireplace, where the cat flew at him and scratched him nearly to pieces. He then jumped out through the back door, and here the goose got him by the trousers. When he was some distance away the cock crowed. He thereupon ran so that you could bear the stones rattle in the dark.
Purple and crimson and out of breath, he came back to his companions.
"Frightful, frightful!" was all that they could get from him at first, but after a while he told them.
"When I looked through the window I saw in the fireplace two bright coals shining, and when I wanted to go through the front door to go and look, I stepped into an iron trap. I jumped into the house, and there some one seized me with a fork and pitched me up on to the loft, there again some one was ready, and threw me down on all fours. I wanted to fly through the middle door, but there some one blew on a trumpet, and smote me with a sledge hammer so that I did not know where I landed; but coming to very quickly, I found I was in the fireplace, and there another flew at me and scratched the eyes almost out of my bead. I thereupon fled out of the back door, and lastly I was attacked on the leg by the sixth with a pair of fire tongs, and when I was still running away, some one shouted out of the house,
Stop him, stop h-i-m!

Not because he was exactly the most capable or progressive fellow in the neighborhood, but because he always gave that idea-that is why Jackal slowly acquired among the neighbors the name of a "progressive man." The truly well-bred people around him, who did not wish to hurt his feelings, seemed to apply this name to him, instead of, for instance, "cunning scamp," or "all-wise rat-trap," as so many others often dubbed him. He obtained this name of "a progressive man" because he spoke most of the time English, especially if he thought some of them were present who could not understand it, and also because he could always hold his body so much like a judge on public occasions.
He had a smooth tongue, could make quite a favorable speech, and especially with good effect could he expatiate on the backwardness of others. Underneath he really was the most unlettered man in the vicinity, but he had perfect control over his inborn cunningness, which allowed him for a long time to go triumphantly through life as a man of great ability.
One time, for instance, he lost his tail in an iron trap. He had long attempted to reach the Boer's goose pen, and had framed many good plans, but when he came to his senses, he was sitting in front of the goose pen with his tail in the iron trap, the dogs all the time coming for him. When he realized what it meant, he mustered together all his strength and pulled his tail, which he always thought so much of, clean off.
This would immediately have made him the butt of the whole neighborhood had he not thought of a plan. He called together a meeting of the jackals, and made them believe that Lion had issued a proclamation to the effect that all jackals in the future should be tailless, because their beautiful tails were a thorn in the eyes of more unfortunate animals.
In his smooth way he told them how he regretted that the king should have the barbaric right to interfere with his subjects. But so it was; and he thought the sooner he paid attention to it the safer. Therefore he had had his tail cut off already and he should advise all his friends to do the same. And so it happened that once all jackals for a long time were without tails. Later on they grew again.
It was about the same time that Tiger hired Jackal as a schoolmaster. Tiger was in those days the richest man in the surrounding country, and as he had had to suffer a great deal himself because he was so untutored, he wanted his children to have the best education that could be obtained.
It was shortly after a meeting, in which it was shown bow important a thing an education was, that Tiger approached Jackal and asked him to come and teach his children.
Jackal was very ready to do this. It was not exactly his vocation, he said, but he would do it to pass time and just out of friendship for his neighbor. His and Tiger's farm lands lay next each other.
That he did not make teaching his profession and that he possessed no degree was of no account in the eyes of Tiger.
"Do not praise my goodness so much, Cousin Jackal," laughed he. "We know your worth well enough. Much rather would I intrust my offspring to you than to the many so-called schoolmasters, for it is especially my wish, as well as that of their mother, to have our children obtain a progressive education, and to make such men and women of them that with the same ability as you have they can take their lawful places in this world."
"One condition," said Jackal, "I must state. It will be very inconvenient for me, almost impossible, to come here to your farm and hold school. My own farm would in that case go to pieces, and that I cannot let happen. It would never pay me."
Tiger answered that it was not exactly necessary either. In spite of their attachment to the little ones, they saw that it would probably be to their benefit to place them for a while in a stranger's house.
Jackal then told of his own bringing up by Wolf. He remembered well how small he was when his father sent him away to study with Wolf. Naturally, since then, he had passed through many schools, Wolf was only his first teacher. And only in his later days did he realize how much good it had done him.
"A man must bend the sapling while it is still young," said he. "There is no time that the child is so open to impressions as when he is plastic, about the age that most of your children are at present, and I was just thinking you would be doing a wise thing to send them away for quite a while."
He had, fortunately, just then a room in his house that would be suited for a schoolroom, and his wife could easily make some arrangement for their lodging, even if they had to enlarge their dwelling somewhat.
It was then and there agreed upon. Tiger's wife was then consulted about one thing and another, and the following day the children were to leave.
"I have just thought of one more thing," remarked Jackal, "seven children, besides my little lot, will be quite a care on our hands, so you will have to send over each week a fat lamb, and in order not to disturb their progress, the children will have to relinquish the idea of a vacation spent with you for some time. When I think they have become used to the bit, I will inform you, and then you can come and take them to make you a short visit, but not until then. "It is also better," continued he, "that they do not see you for the first while, but your wife can come and see them every Saturday and I will see to all else."
On the following day there was an unearthly howling and wailing when the children were to leave. But Tiger and their mother showed them that it was best and that some day they would see that it was all for their good, and that their parents were doing it out of kindness. Eventually they were gone.
The first Saturday dawned, and early that morning Mrs. Tiger was on her way to Jackal's dwelling, because she could not defer the time any longer.
She was still a long way off when Jackal caught sight of her. He always observed neighborly customs, and so stepped out to meet her.
After they had greeted each other, Mrs. Tiger's first question was: "Well, Cousin Jackal, how goes everything with the small team? Are they still all well and happy, and do they not trouble you, Cousin Jackal, too much?"
"Oh, my goodness, no, Mrs. Tiger," answered Jackal enthusiastically, "but don't let us talk so loud, because if they beard you, it certainly would cause them many heartfelt tears and they might also want to go back with you and then all our trouble would have been for nothing."
"But I would like to see them, Cousin Jackal," said Mrs. Tiger a little disturbed.
"Why certainly, Mrs. Tiger," was his answer, "but I do not think it is wise for them to see you. I will lift them up to the window one by one, and then you can put your mind at rest concerning their health and progress."
After Mr. and Mrs. Jackal and Mrs. Tiger had sat together for some time drinking coffee and talking over one thing and another, Jackal took Tiger's wife to a door and told her to look through it, out upon the back yard. There he would show her the children one by one, while they would not be able to see her. Everything was done exactly as Jackal had said, but the sixth little tiger he picked up twice, because the firstborn he had the day before prepared in pickle for their Sunday meal.
And so it happened every Saturday until the last little tiger-which was the youngest-had to be lifted up seven times in succession.
And when Mrs. Tiger came again the following week all was still as death and everything seemed to have a deserted appearance on the estate. She walked straight to the front door, and there she found a letter in the poll grass near the door, which read thus:
"We have gone for a picnic with the children. From there we will ride by Jackals' dance for New Year. This is necessary for the completion of their progressive education."
Saturday after Saturday did Mrs. Tiger go and look, but every time Jackal's house seemed to look more deserted; and after a while there was a spider's web over the door and the trail of Snake showed that he, too, had taken up his abode there.

The birds wanted a king. Men have a king, so have animals, and why shouldn't they? All had assembled.
"The Ostrich, because he is the largest," one called out.
"No, he can't fly."
"Eagle, on account of his strength."
"Not he, he is too ugly."
"Vulture, because he can fly the highest."
"No, Vulture is too dirty, his odor is terrible."
"Peacock, he is so beautiful."
"His feet are too ugly, and also his voice."
"Owl, because he can see well."
"Not Owl, he is ashamed of the light."
And so they got no further. Then one shouted aloud, "He who can fly the highest will be king." "Yes, yes," they all screamed, and at a given Signal they all ascended straight up into the sky.
Vulture flew for three whole days without stopping, straight toward the sun. Then he cried aloud, "I am the highest, I am king."
"T-sie, t-sie, t-sie," he heard above him. There Tink-tinkje was flying. He had held fast to one of the great wing feathers of Vulture, and had never been felt, he was so light. "T-sie, t-sie, t-sle, I am the highest, I am king," piped Tink-tinkje.
Vulture flew for another day still ascending. "I am highest, I am king."
"T-sie, t-sie, t-sie, I am the highest, I am king," Tink-tinkje mocked. There he was again, having crept out from under the wing of Vulture.
Vulture flew on the fifth day straight up in the air. "I am the highest, I am king," he called.
"T-sie, t-sie, t-sie," piped the little fellow above him. "I am the highest, I am king."
Vulture was tired and now flew direct to earth. The other birds were mad through and through. Tink-tinkje must die because he had taken advantage of Vulture's feathers and there hidden himself. All flew after him and he had to take refuge in a mouse hole. But how were they to get him out? Some one must stand guard to seize him the moment he put out his head.
"Owl must keep guard; he has the largest eyes; he can see well," they exclaimed.
Owl went and took up his position before the hole. The sun was warm and soon Owl became sleepy and presently he was fast asleep.
Tink-tinkje peeped, saw that Owl was asleep, and z-zip away he went. Shortly afterwards the other birds came to see if Tink-tinkje were still in the hole. "T-sie, t-sie," they heard in a tree; and there the little vagabond was sitting.
White-crow, perfectly disgusted, turned around and exclaimed, "Now I won't say a single word more." And from that day to this Whitecrow has never spoken. Even though you strike him, he makes no sound, he utters no cry.

Lion had now caught a large eland which lay dead on the top of a high bank. Lion was thirsty and wanted to go and drink water. " Jackal, look after my eland, I am going to get a drink. Don't you eat any."
"Very well, Uncle Lion."
Lion went to the river and Jackal quietly removed a stone on which Lion had to step to reach the bank on his return. After that Jackal and his wife ate heartily of the eland. Lion returned, but could not scale the bank. " Jackal, help me," he shouted.
"Yes, Uncle Lion, I will let down a rope and then you can climb up."
Jackal whispered to his wife, "Give me one of the old, thin hide ropes." And then aloud he added, "Wife, give me one of the strong, buffalo ropes, so Uncle Lion won't fall."
His wife gave him an old rotten rope. Jackal and his wife first ate ravenously of the meat, then gradually let the rope down. Lion seized it and struggled up. When he neared the brink Jackal gave the rope a jerk. It broke and down Lion began to roll-rolled the whole way down, and finally lay at the foot near the river.
Jackal began to beat a dry hide that lay there as he howled, cried, and shouted: "Wife, why did you give me such a bad rope that caused Uncle Lion to fall? "
Lion heard the row and roared, "Jackal, stop beating your wife. I will hurt you if you don't cease. Help me to climb up."
"Uncle Lion, I will give you a rope." Whispering again to his wife, "Give me one of the old, thin hide ropes," and shouting aloud again, "Give me a strong, buffalo rope, wife, that will not break again with Lion."
Jackal gave out the rope, and when Lion had nearly reached the top, he cut the rope through. Snap! and Lion began to roll to the bottom. Jackal again beat on the hide and shouted, "Wife, why did you give me such a rotten rope? Didn't I tell you to give me a strong one? " Lion roared, "Jackal, stop beating your wife at once. Help me instantly or you will be sorry."
"Wife," Jackal said aloud, "give me now the strongest rope you have," and aside to her, "Give me the worst rope of the lot."
Jackal again let down a rope, but just as Lion reached the top, Jackal gave a strong tug and broke the rope. Poor old Lion rolled down the side of the hill and lay there roaring from pain. He had been fatally hurt.
Jackal inquired, "Uncle Lion, have you hurt yourself? Have you much pain? Wait a while, I am coming directly to help you." Jackal and his wife slowly walked away.

The Lion and the Jackal agreed to hunt on shares, for the purpose of laying in a stock of meat for the winter months for their families.
As the Lion was by far the more expert hunter of the two, the Jackal suggested that he (himself) should be employed in transporting the game to their dens, and that Mrs. Jackal and the little Jackals should prepare and dry the meat, adding that they would take care that Mrs. Lion and her family should not want.
This was agreed to by the Lion, and the hunt commenced.
After a very successful hunt, which lasted for some time, the Lion returned to see his family, and also to enjoy, as he thought, a plentiful supply of his spoil; when, to his utter surprise, he found Mrs. Lion and all the young Lions on the point of death from sheer hunger, and in a mangy state. The Jackal, it appeared, had only given them a few entrails of the game, and in such limited quantities as barely to keep them alive; always telling them that they (i. e., the Lion and himself) had been most unsuccessful in their hunting; while his own family was reveling in abundance, and each member of it was sleek and fat.
This was too much for the Lion to bear. He immediately started off in a terrible fury, vowing certain death to the Jackal and all his family, wherever he should meet them. The Jackal was more or less prepared for a storm, and had taken the precaution to remove all his belongings to the top of a krantz (i. e., a cliff), accessible only by a most difficult and circuitous path, which he alone knew.
When the Lion saw him on the krantz, the Jackal immediately greeted him by calling out,
Good morning, Uncle Lion."
"How dare you call me uncle, you impudent scoundrel," roared out the Lion, in a voice of thunder," after the way in which you have behaved to my family?"
"Oh, Uncle! How shall I explain matters? That beast of a wife of mine!" Whack, whack was heard, as he beat with a stick on dry hide, which was a mere pretence for Mrs. Jackal's back; while that lady was preinstructed to scream whenever he operated on the hide, which she did with a vengeance, joined by the little Jackals, who set up a most doleful chorus. "That wretch!" said the Jackal. "It is all her doing. I shall kill her straight off," and away he again belabored the hide, while his wife and children uttered such a dismal howl that the Lion begged of him to leave off flogging his wife. After cooling down a little, he invited Uncle Lion to come up and have something to eat. The Lion, after several ineffectual attempts to scale the precipice, had to give it up.
The Jackal, always ready for emergencies, suggested that a reim should be lowered to haul up his uncle. This was agreed to, and when the Lion was drawn about halfway up by the whole family of Jackals, the reim was cleverly cut, and down went the Lion with a tremendous crash which hurt him very much. Upon this, the Jackal again performed upon the hide with tremendous force, for their daring to give him such a rotten reim, and Mrs. Jackal and the little ones responded with some fearful screams and yells. He then called loudly out to his wife for a strong buffalo reim which would support any weight. This again was lowered and fastened to the Lion, when all bands pulled away at their uncle; and, just when he had reached so far that he could look over the precipice into the pots to see all the fat meat cooking, and all the biltongs hanging out to dry, the reim was again cut, and the poor Lion fell with such force that he was fairly stunned for some time. After the Lion had recovered his senses, the Jackal, in a most sympathizing tone, suggested that he was afraid that it was of no use to attempt to haul him up onto the precipice, and recommended, instead, that a nice fat piece of eland's breast be roasted and dropped into the Lion's mouth. The Lion, half famished with hunger, and much bruised, readily accepted the offer, and sat eagerly awaiting the fat morsel.
In the mean time, the Jackal had a round stone made red-hot, and wrapped a quantity of inside fat, or suet, round it, to make it appear like a ball of fat. When the Lion saw it held out, he opened his capacious mouth to the utmost extent, and the wily Jackal cleverly dropped the hot ball right into it, which ran through the poor old beast, killing him on the spot.
It need hardly be told that there was great rejoicing on the precipice that night.

Lion and Jackal, it is said, were one day lying in wait for Eland. Lion shot (with a bow) and missed, but Jackal hit and sang out, "Hah! hah!"
Lion said, "No, you did not shoot anything. It was I who hit."
Jackal answered, "Yea, my father, thou hast hit."
Then they went home in order to return when the eland was dead, and cut it up. Jackal, however, turned back, unknown to Lion, hit his nose so that the blood ran on the spoor of the eland, and followed their track thus, in order to cheat Lion. When he had gone some distance, he returned by another way to the dead eland, and creeping into its carcass, cut out all the fat.
Meanwhile Lion followed the blood-stained spoor of Jackal, thinking that it was eland blood, and only when he had gone some distance did he find out that he had been deceived. He then returned on Jackal's spoor, and reached the dead eland, where, finding Jackal in its carcass, he seized him by his tail and drew him out with a swing.
Lion upbraided Jackal with these words:
"Why do you cheat me?"
Jackal answered: "No, my father, I do not cheat you; you may know it, I think. I prepared this fat for you, father."
Lion said: "Then take the fat and carry it to your mother " (the lioness) ; and he gave him the lungs to take to his own wife and children.
When Jackal arrived, he did not give the fat to Lion's wife, but to his own wife and children; he gave, however, the lungs to Lion's wife, and he pelted Lion's little children with the lungs, saying:
"You children of the big-pawed one!
You big-pawed ones!"
He said to Lioness, "I go to help my father (the lion) ; but he went far away with his wife and children.

Little Jackal one day went out hunting, when he met Lion. Lion proposed that they should hunt together, on condition that if a small antelope was killed it was to be Little Jackal's, and if a large one was killed it was to be Lion's. Little Jackal agreed to this.
The first animal killed was a large eland. Lion was very glad, and said to Little Jackal: "I will continue hunting while you go to my house and call my children to carry the meat home."
Little Jackal replied: "Yes, I agree to that."
Lion went away to hunt. When he had gone, Little Jackal went to his own house and called his own children to carry away the meat. He said: "Lion takes me for a fool if he thinks I will call his children while my own are dying with hunger."
So Little Jackal's children carried the meat to their home on the top of a high rock, where the only way to get to their house was by means of a rope.
Lion caught nothing more, and after a time he went home and asked his wife where the meat was. She told him there was no meat. He said: "Did not Little Jackal bring a message to my children to carry meat? "
His wife replied: "No, he was not here. We are still dying with hunger."
Lion then went to Little Jackal's house, but he could not get up the rock to it. So he sat down by the water, waiting. After a time Little Jackal went to get some water. He was close to the water when he saw Lion. He at once ran away, and Lion ran after him. He ran into a hole under a tree, but Lion caught his tail before he got far in. He said to him: "That is not my tail you have hold of; it is a root of the tree. If you do not believe me, take a stone and strike it, and see if any blood comes."
Lion let go the tail, and went for a stone to prove what it was. While he was gone for the stone, Little Jackal went far into the hole. When Lion returned he could not be found. Lion lay down by the hole and waited. After a long time Little Jackal wanted to come out. He went to the entrance and looked round, but he could not see Lion. To make sure, he said: "Ho, I see you, my master, although you are in hiding."
Lion did not move from the place where he lay concealed. Then Little Jackal went out, and Lion pursued him, but he got away.
Lion watched for him, and one day, when Little Jackal was out hunting, he came upon him in a place where he could not escape. Lion was just about to spring upon him, when Little Jackal said softly: "Be still, do you not see that bushbuck on the other side of the rock? I am glad you have come to help me. Just remain here while I run round and drive him toward you."
Lion did so, and Little Jackal made his escape.
At another time there was a meeting of the animals, and Lion was the chief at the meeting. Little Jackal wanted to attend, but there was a law made that no one should be present unless he had horns. So Little Jackal took wax out of a nest of bees, and made horns for himself with it. He fastened the horns on his head, and went to the meeting. Lion did not know him on account of the horns. But he sat near the fire and went to sleep, when the horns melted.
Lion looked at him and saw who it was. He immediately tried to catch him, but Little Jackal was quick in springing away. He ran under an overhanging rock and sang out: "Help! help! this rock is falling upon me!"
Lion went for a pole to prop up the rock that he might get at Little Jackal. While he was away, Little Jackal escaped.
After that they became companions again, and went hunting another time. They killed an ox. Lion said: "I will watch it while you carry the pieces away."
Lion gave him the breast, and said: "Take this to my wife."
Little Jackal took it to his own wife. When he returned, Lion gave him a shin, and said:
"Take this to your wife."
Little Jackal took the shin to Lion's house. Lion's wife said: "I cannot take this because it should not come here."
Little Jackal thereupon struck Lion's wife in the face, and went back to the place where the ox was killed. Lion gave him a large piece of meat and said: "Take this to my wife."
Little Jackal took it to his own wife. This continued till the ox was flnished. Then they both went home. When Lion arrived at his house he found there was weeping in his family.
His wife said: "Is it you who sent Little Jackal to beat me and my children, and is it you who sent this shin? Did I ever eat a shin? "
When Lion heard this he was very angry and at once went to Little Jackal's house. When he reached the rock, Little Jackal looked down and said: "Who are you, and what is your name, and whose son are you, and where are you from, and where are you going to, and whom do you want, and what do you want him for?"
Lion replied: "I have merely come to see you. I wish you to let down the rope."
Little Jackal let down a rope made of mouse skins, and when Lion climbed a little way up, the rope broke, and he fell and was hurt. He then went home.

It is said, once a lioness roared, and the ostrich also roared. The lioness went toward the place where the ostrich was. They met. The lioness said to the ostrich, "Please to roar." The ostrich roared. Then the lioness roared. The voices were equal. The lioness said to the ostrich, "You are my match."
Then the lioness said to the ostrich, "Let us hunt game together." They saw eland and made toward it. The lioness caught only one; the ostrich killed a great many by striking them with the claw which was on his leg; but the lioness killed only one. When they had met after the hunting they went to the game, and the lioness saw that the ostrich had killed a great deal.
Now, the lioness also had young cubs. They went to the shade to rest themselves. The lioness said to the ostrich, "Get up and rip open; let us eat." Said the ostrich, "Go and rip open; I shall eat the blood." The lioness stood up and ripped open, and ate with the cubs. And when she had eaten, the ostrich got up and ate the blood. They went to sleep.
The cubs played about. While they were playing, they went to the ostrich, who was asleep. When he went to sleep he also opened his mouth. The young lions saw that the ostrich had no teeth. They went to their mother and said, "This fellow, who says he is your equal, has no teeth; he is insulting you." Then the lioness went to wake the ostrich, and said, "Get up, let us fight"; and they fought. And the ostrich said, "Go to that side of the anthill, and I will go to this side of it." The ostrich struck the anthill, and sent it toward the lioness. But the second time he struck the lioness in a vulnerable spot, near the liver, and killed her.

Crocodile was, in the days when animals still could talk, the acknowledged foreman of all water creatures and if one should judge from appearances one would say that he still is. But in those days it was his especial duty to have a general care of all water animals, and when one year it was exceedingly dry, and the water of the river where they had lived dried up and became scarce, he was forced to make it plan to trek over to another river a short distance from there.
He first sent Otter out to spy. He stayed away two days and brought back a report that there was still good water in the other river, real sea-cow holes, that not even a drought of several years could dry up.
After he had ascertained this, Crocodile called to his side Tortoise and Alligator.
"Look here," said he, "I need you two tonight to carry a report to Lion. So then get ready; the veldt is dry, and you will probably have to travel for a few days without any water. We must make peace with Lion and his subjects, otherwise we utterly perish this year. And he must help us to trek over to the other river, especially past. the Boer's farm that lies in between, and to travel unmolested by any of the animals of the veldt, so long as the trek lasts. A fish on land is sometimes a very helpless thing, as you all know." The two had it mighty hard in the burning sun, and on the dry veldt, but eventually they reached Lion and handed him the treaty.
"What is going on now?" thought Lion to himself, when he had read it. "I must consult Jackal first," said he. But to the commissioners he gave back an answer that he would be the following evening with his advisers at the appointed place, at the big vaarland willow tree, at the farther end of the hole of water, where Crocodile had his headquarters.
When Tortoise and Alligator came back, Crocodile was exceedingly pleased with himself at the turn the case had taken.
He allowed Otter and a few others to be present and ordered them on that evening to have ready plenty of fish and other eatables for their guests under the vaarland willow.
That evening as it grew dark Lion appeared with Wolf, Jackal, Baboon, and a few other important animals, at the appointed place, and they were received in the most open-hearted manner by Crocodile and the other water creatures.
Crocodile was so glad at the meeting of the animals that he now and then let fall a great tear of joy that disappeared into the sand. After the other animals had done well by the fish, Crocodile laid bare to them the condition of affairs and opened up his plan. He wanted only peace among all animals; for they not only destroyed one another, but the Boer, too, would in time destroy them all.
The Boer had already stationed at the source of the river no less than three steam pumps to irrigate his land, and the water was becoming scarcer every day. More than this, he took advantage of their unfortunate position by making them sit in the shallow water and then, one after the other, bringing about their death. As Lion was, on this account, inclined to make peace, it was to his glory to take this opportunity and give his hand to these peace-making water creatures, and carry out their part of the contract, namely, escort them from the dried-up water, past the Boer's farm and to the long sea-cow pools.
"And what benefit shall we receive from it?" asked Jackal.
"Well," answered Crocodile, "the peace made is of great benefit to both sides. We will not exterminate each other. If you desire to come and drink water, you can do so with an easy mind, and not be the least bit nervous that I, or any one of us will seize you by the nose; and so also with all the other animals. And from your side we are to be freed from Elephant, who has the habit, whenever he gets the opportunity, of tossing us with his trunk up into some open and narrow fork of a tree and there allowing us to become biltong."
Lion and Jackal stepped aside to consult with one another, and then Lion wanted to know what form of security he would have that Crocodile would keep to his part of the contract.
"I stake my word of honor," was the prompt answer from Crocodile, and he let drop a few more long tears of honesty into the sand.
Baboon then said it was all square and honest as far as he could see into the case. He thought it was nonsense to attempt to dig pitfalls for one another; because he personally was well aware that his race would benefit somewhat from this contract of peace and friendship. And more than this, they must consider that use must be made of the fast disappearing water, for even in the best of times it was an unpleasant thing to be always carrying your life about in your bands. He would, however, like to suggest to the King that it would be well to have everything put down in writing, so that there would be nothing to regret in case it was needed.
Jackal did not want to listen to the agreement. He could not see that it would benefit the animals of the veldt. But Wolf, who had fully satisfied himself with the fish, was in an exceptionally peace-loving mood, and he advised Lion again to close the agreement.
After Lion had listened to all his advisers, and also the pleading tones of Crocodile's followers, lie held forth in a speech in which he said that he was inclined to enter into the agreement, seeing that it was clear that Crocodile and his subjects were in a very tight place.
There and then a document was drawn up, and it was resolved, before midnight, to begin the trek. Crocodile's messengers swam in all directions to summon together the water animals for the trek.
Frogs croaked and crickets chirped in the long water grass. It was not long before all the animals had assembled at the vaarland willow. In the meantime Lion had sent out a few despatch riders to his subjects to raise a commando for an escort, and long ere midnight these also were at the vaarland willow in the moonlight.
The trek then was regulated by Lion and Jackal. Jackal was to take the lead to act as spy, and when he was able to draw Lion to one side, he said to him:
"See here, I do not trust this affair one bit, and I want to tell you straight out, I am going to make tracks! I will spy for you until you reach the sea-cow pool, but I am not going to be the one to await your arrival there."
Elephant had to act as advance guard because he could walk so softly and could hear and smell so well. Then came Lion with one division of the animals, then Crocodile's trek with a flank protection of both sides, and Wolf received orders to bring up the rear.
Meanwhile, while all this was being arranged, Crocodile was smoothly preparing his treason. He called Yellow Snake to one side and said to him: "It is to our advantage to have these animals, who go among us every day, and who will continue to do so, fall into the hands of the Boer. Listen, now! You remain behind unnoticed, and when you hear me shout you will know that we have arrived safely at the seacow pool. Then you must harass the Boer's dogs as much as you can, and the rest will look out for themselves."
Thereupon the trek moved on. It was necessary to go very slowly as many of the water animals were not accustomed to the journey on land; but they trekked past the Boer's farm in safety, and toward break of day they were all safely at the sea-cow pool. There most of the water animals disappeared suddenly into the deep water, and Crocodile also began to make preparations to follow their example. With tearful eyes he said to Lion that he was, oh, so thankful for the help, that, from pure relief and joy, he must first give vent to his feelings by a few screams. Thereupon he suited his words to actions so that even the mountains echoed, and then thanked Lion on behalf of his subjects, and purposely continued with a long speech, dwelling on all the benefits both sides would derive from the agreement of peace.
Lion was just about to say good day and take his departure, when the first shot fell, and with it Elephant and a few other animals.
"I told you all so!" shouted Jackal from the other side of the sea-cow pool. "Why did you allow yourselves to he misled by a few Crocodile tears? "
Crocodile had disappeared long ago into the water. All one saw was just a lot of bubbles; and on the banks there was an actual war against the animals. It simply crackled the way the Boers shot them.
But most of them, fortunately, came out of it alive.
Shortly after, they say, Crocodile received his well-earned reward, when he met a driver with a load of dynamite. And even now when the Elephant gets the chance he pitches them up into the highest forks of the trees.

Here was a great drought in the land; and Lion called together a number of animals so that they might devise a plan for retaining water when the rains fell.
The animals which attended at Lion's summons were Baboon, Leopard, Hyena, Jackal, Hare, and Mountain Tortoise.
It was agreed that they should scratch a large hole in some suitable place to hold water; and the next day they all began to work, with the exception of Jackal, who continually hovered about in that locality, and was overheard to mutter that he was not going to scratch his nails off in making water holes.
When the dam was finished the rains fell, and it was soon filled with water, to the great delight of those who had worked so bard at it. The first one, however, to come and drink there, was Jackal, who not only drank, but filled his clay pot with water, and then proceeded to swim in the rest of the water, making it as muddy and dirty as he could.
This was brought to the knowledge of Lion. who was very angry and ordered Baboon to guard the water the next day, armed with a huge knobkirrie. Baboon was concealed in a bush close to the water; but Jackal soon became aware of his presence there, and guessed its cause. Knowing the fondness of baboons for honey, Jackal at once hit upon a plan, and marching to and fro, every now and then dipped his fingers into his clay pot, and licked them with an expression of intense relish, saying, in a. low voice to himself, "I don't want any of their dirty water when I have a pot full of delicious honey." This was too much for poor Baboon, whose mouth began to water. He soon began to beg Jackal to give him a little honey, as he had been watching for several hours, and was very hungry and tired.
After taking no notice of Baboon at first, Jackal looked round, and said, in a patronizing manner, that he pitied such an unfortunate creature, and would give him some honey on certain conditions, viz., that Baboon should give up his knobkirrie and allow himself to be bound by Jackal. He foolishly agreed; and was soon tied in such a manner that he could not move hand or foot.
Jackal now proceeded to drink of the water, to fill his pot, and to swim in the sight of Baboon, from time to time telling him what a foolish fellow he had been to be so easily duped, and that he (Jackal) had no honey or anything else to give him, excepting a good blow on the head every now and then with his own knobkirrie.
The animals soon appeared and found poor Baboon in this sorry plight, looking the picture of misery. Lion was so exasperated that he caused Baboon to be severely punished, and to be denounced as a fool.
Tortoise hereupon stepped forward, and offered his services for the capture of Jackal. It was at first thought that he was merely joking; but when he explained in what manner he proposed to catch him, his plan was considered so feasible that his offer was accepted. He proposed that a thick coating of "bijenwerk" (a kind of sticky black substance found on beehives) should be spread all over him, and that he should then go and stand at the entrance of the dam, on the water level, so that Jackal might tread upon him and stick fast. This was accordingly done and Tortoise posted there.
The next day, when Jackal came, he approached the water very cautiously, and wondered to find no one there. He then ventured to the entrance of the water, and remarked how kind they had been in placing there a large black stepping-stone for him. As soon, however, as he trod upon the supposed stone, he stuck fast, and saw that he had been tricked; for Tortoise now put his head out and began to move. Jackal's bind feet being still free he threatened to smash Tortoise with them if he did not let him go. Tortoise merely answered, "Do as you like." Jackal thereupon made a violent jump, and found, with horror, that his hind feet were now also fast. "Tortoise," said he, "I have still my mouth and teeth left, and will eat you alive if you do not let me go." "Do as you like," Tortoise again replied. Jackal, in his endeavors to free himself, at last made a desperate bite at Tortoise, and found himself fixed, both head and feet. Tortoise, feeling proud of his successful capture, now marched quietly up to the top of the bank with Jackal on his back, so that he could easily be seen by the animals as they came to the water.
They were indeed astonished to find how cleverly the crafty Jackal had been caught; and Tortoise was much praised, while the unhappy Baboon was again reminded of his misconduct when set to guard the water.
Jackal was at once condemned to death by Lion; and Hyena was to execute the sentence. Jackal pleaded hard for mercy, but finding this useless, he made a last request to Lion (always, as he said, so fair and just in his dealings) that he should not have to suffer a lingering death.
Lion inquired of him in what manner he wished to die; and he asked that his tail might be shaved and rubbed with a little fat, and that Hyena might then swing him round twice. and dash his brains out upon a stone. This, being considered sufficiently fair by Lion, was ordered by him to be carried out in his presence.
When Jackal's tail had been shaved and greased, Hyena caught hold of him with great force, and before he had fairly lifted him from the ground, the cunning Jackal had slipped away from Hyena's grasp, and was running for his life, pursued by all the animals.
Lion was the foremost pursuer, and after a great chase Jackal got under an overhanging precipice, and, standing on his hind legs with his shoulders pressed against the rock, called loudly to Lion to help him, as the rock was falling, and would crush them both. Lion put his shoulders to the rock, and exerted himself to the utmost. After some little time Jackal proposed that he should creep slowly out, and fetch a large pole to prop up the rock, so that Lion could get out and save his life. Jackal did creep out, and left Lion there to starve and die.

There was a frightful drought. The rivers after a while dried tip and even the springs gave no water.
The animals wandered around seeking drink, but to no avail. Nowhere was water to be found.
A great gathering of animals was held: Lion, Tiger, Wolf, Jackal, Elephant, all of them came together. What was to be done? That was the question. One had this plan, and another had that; but no plan seemed of value.
Finally one of them suggested: "Come, let all of us go to the dry river bed and dance; in that way we can tread out the water."

Good! Everyone was satisfied and ready to begin instantly, excepting Rabbit, who said, "I will not go and dance. All of you are mad to attempt to get water from the ground by dancing."
 other animals danced and danced, and ultimately danced the water to the surface. How glad they were. Everyone drank as much as he could, but Rabbit did not dance with them. So it was decided that Rabbit should have no water.
 laughed at them: "I will nevertheless drink some of your water."
 evening he proceeded leisurely to the river bed where the dance had been, and drank as much as he wanted. The following morning the animals saw the footprints of Rabbit in the ground, and Rabbit shouted to them: "Aha! I did have some of the water, and it was most refreshing and tasted fine."
 all the animals were called together. What were they to do? How were they to get Rabbit in their hands? All had some means to propose; the one suggested this, and the other that.
 old Tortoise moved slowly forward, foot by foot: "I will catch Rabbit."
You? How? What do you think of yourself?" shouted the others in unison.
Rub my shell with pitch, and I will go to the edge of the water and lie down. I will then resemble a stone, so that when Rabbit steps on me his feet will stick fast."
Yes! Yes! That's good."
 in a one, two, three, Tortoise's shell was covered with pitch, and foot by foot he moved away to the river. At the edge, close to the water, he lay down and drew his head into his shell.
Rabbit during the evening came to get a drink. "Ha!" he chuckled sarcastically," they are, after all, quite decent. Here they have placed a stone, so now I need not unnecessarily wet my feet."

Rabbit trod with his left foot on the stone, and there it stuck. Tortoise then put his head out. "Ha! old Tortoise! And it's you, is it, that's holding me. But here I still have another foot. I'll give you a good clout." Rabbit gave Tortoise what he said he would with his right fore foot, hard and straight; and there his foot remained.
"I have yet a hind foot, and with it I'll kick you." Rabbit drove his bind foot down. This also rested on Tortoise where it struck.
"But still another foot remains, and now I'll tread you." He stamped his foot down, but it stuck like the others.
He used his head to hammer Tortoise, and his tail as a whip, but both met the same fate as his feet, so there he was tight and fast down to the pitch.
Tortoise now slowly turned himself round and foot by foot started for the other animals, with Rabbit on his back.
"Ha! ha! ha! Rabbit! How does it look now? Insolence does not pay after all," shouted the animals.
Now advice was sought. What should they do with Rabbit? He certainly must die. But how? One said, "Behead him"; another, "Some severe penalty."
"Rabbit, how are we to kill you?"
"It does not affect me," Rabbit said. "Only a shameful death please do not pronounce."
"And what is that?" they all shouted.
"To take me by my tail and dash my head against a stone; that I pray and beseech you don't do."
"No, but just so you'll die. That is decided."
It was decided Rabbit should die by taking him by his tail and dashing his head to pieces against some stone. But who is to do it?
Lion, because he is the most powerful one.
Good! Lion should do it. He stood up, walked to the front, and poor Rabbit was brought to him. Rabbit pleaded and beseeched that he couldn't die such a miserable death.
Lion took Rabbit firmly by the tail and swung him around. The white skin slipped off from Rabbit, and there Lion stood with the white bit of skin and hair in his paw. Rabbit was free.

Every evening Jackal went to the Boer's kraal. He crept through the sliding door and stole a fat young lamb. This, clever Jackal did several times in succession. Boer set a wip for him at the door. Jackal went again and zip-there he was caught around the body by the noose. He swung and swayed high in the air and couldn't touch ground. The day began to dawn and Jackal became uneasy.
On a stone kopje, Monkey sat. When it became light he could see the whole affair, and descended hastily for the purpose of mocking Jackal. He went and sat on the wall. "Ha,
ha, good morning. So there you are hanging now, eventually caught."
"What? I caught? I am simply swinging for my pleasure; it is enjoyable."
"You fibber. You are caught in the wip."
"If you but realized how nice it was to swing and sway like this, you wouldn't hesitate. Come, try it a little. You feel so healthy and strong for the day, and you never tire afterwards."
"No, I won't. You are caught."
After a while Jackal convinced Monkey. He sprang from the kraal wall, and freeing Jackal, adjusted the noose around his own body. Jackal quickly let go and began to laugh, as Monkey was now swinging high in the air.
"Ha, ha, ha," he laughed. "Now Monkey is in the wip."
"Jackal, free me," he screamed.
"There, Boer is coming," shouted Jackal.
"Jackal, free me of this, or I'll break your playthings."
"No, there Boer is coming with his gun; you rest a while in the noose."
"Jackal, quickly make me free."
"No, here's Boer already, and he's got his gun. Good morning." And with these parting words he ran away as fast as he could. Boer came and saw Monkey in the wip.
"So, so, Monkey, now you are caught. You are the fellow who has been stealing my lambs, hey? "
"No, Boer, no," screamed Monkey, " not I, but Jackal."
"No, I know you; you aren't too good for that."
"No, Boer, no, not I, but Jackal," Monkey stammered.
"Oh, I know you. Just wait a little," and Boer, raising his gun, aimed and shot poor Monkey dead.

Lion and Jackal went together a-hunting. They shot with arrows. Lion shot first, but his arrow fell short of its aim; but Jackal hit the game, and joyfully cried out, "It has hit."
Lion looked at him with his two large eyes; Jackal, however, did not lose his countenance, but said, "No, uncle, I mean to say that you have hit." Then they followed the game, and Jackal passed the arrow of Lion without drawing the latter's attention to it. When they arrived at a crossway, Jackal said: "Dear uncle, you are old and tired; stay here." Jackal went then on a wrong track, beat his nose, and, in returning, let the blood drop from it like traces of game." I could not find anything," he said, "but I met with traces of blood. You had better go yourself to look for it. In the meantime I shall go this other way."
Jackal soon found the killed animal, crept inside of it, and devoured the best portion; but his tail remained outside, and when Lion arrived, he got hold of it, pulled Jackal out, and threw him on the ground with these words:
"You rascal! "
Jackal rose quickly again, complained of the rough handling, and asked, " What have I now done, dear uncle? I was busy cutting out the best part."
"Now let us go and fetch our wives," said Lion, but Jackal entreated his dear uncle to remain at the place because he was old. Jackal then went away, taking with him two portions of the flesh, one for his own wife, but the best part for the wife of Lion. When Jackal arrived with the flesh, the children of Lion, seeing him, began to jump, and clapping their hands, cried out: "There comes cousin with flesh!" Jackal threw, grumbling, the worst portion to them, and said, "There, you brood of the big-eyed one!" Then he went to his own house and told his wife immediately to break up the house, and to go where the killed game was. Lioness wished to do the same, but he forbade her, and said that Lion would himself come to fetch her.
When Jackal, with his wife and children, arrived in the neighborhood of the killed animal, he ran into a thorn bush, scratched his face so that it bled, and thus made his appearance before Lion, to whom he said, "Ah! what a wife you have got. Look here, how she scratched my face when I told her that she should come with us. You must fetch her yourself; I cannot bring her." Lion went home very angry. Then Jackal said, "Quick, let us build a tower." They heaped stone upon stone, stone upon stone, stone upon stone; and when it was high enough, everything was carried to the top of it. When Jackal saw Lion approaching with his wife and children, he cried out to him:
"Uncle, whilst you were away we have built a tower, in order to be better able to see game."
"All right," said Lion; "but let me come up to you,"
Certainly, dear uncle; but how will you manage to come up? We must let down a thong for you."
Lion tied the thong around his body and Jackal began drawing him up, but when nearly to the top Jackal cried to Lion, "My, uncle, how heavy you are!" Then, unseen by Lion, he cut the thong. Lion fell to the ground, while Jackal began loudly and angrily to scold his wife, and then said, " Go, wife, fetch me a new thong"-"an old one," he said aside to her.
Lion again tied himself to the thong, and, just as he was near the top, Jackal cut the thong as before; Lion fell heavily to the bottom, groaning aloud, as he had been seriously hurt.
"No," said Jackal, "that will never do; you must, however, manage to come up high enough so that you may get a mouthful at least." Then aloud he ordered his wife to prepare a good piece, but aside he told her to make a stone hot, and to cover it with fat. Then he drew Lion up once more, and complaining how heavy he was to hold, told him to open his mouth, and thereupon threw the hot stone down his throat. Lion fell to the ground and lay there pleading for water, while Jackal climbed down and made his escape.

Jackal, it is said, married Hyena, and carried off a cow belonging to the ants, to slaughter her for the wedding; and when he had slaughtered her, he put the cowskin over his bride; and when he had fixed a pole (on which to bang the flesh), he placed on the top of the pole (which was forked) the hearth for the cooking, in order to cook upon it all sorts of delicious food. There came also Lion, and wished to go up. Jackal, therefore, asked his little daughter for a thong with which he could pull Lion up; and he began to pull him up; and when his face came near to the cooking-pot, he cut the thong in two, so that Lion tumbled down. Then Jackal upbraided his little daughter with these words: "Why do you give me such an old thong?" And he added, "Give me a fresh thong." She gave him a new thong, and he pulled Lion up again, and when his face came near the pot, which stood on the fire, he said, "open your mouth." Then he put into his mouth a hot piece of quartz which had been boiled together with the fat, and the stone went down, burning his throat. Thus died Lion.
There came also the ants running after the cow, and when Jackal saw them he fled. Then they beat the bride in her brookaross dress. Hyena, believing that it was Jackal, said:
"You tawny rogue! have you not played at beating long enough? Have you no more loving game than this?"
But when she had bitten a hole through the cowskin, she saw that they were other people; then she fled, falling here and there, yet made her escape.

Once upon a time the animals made a kraal and put some fat in it. They agreed that one of their number should remain to be the keeper of the gate. The first one that was appointed was the coney (imbila). He agreed to take charge, and all the others went away. In a short time the coney fell asleep, when the inkalimeva (a fabulous animal) went in and ate all the fat. After doing this, he threw a little stone at the coney.
The coney started up and cried out: "The fat belonging to all the animals has been eaten by the inkalimeva."
It repeated this cry several times, calling out very loudly. The animals at a distance heard it, they ran to the kraal, and when they saw that the fat was gone they killed the coney.
They put fat in the kraal a second time, and appointed the muishond (ingaga) to keep the gate. The muishond consented, and the animals went away as before. After a little time the inkalimeva came to the kraal, bringing some honey with it. It invited the keeper of the gate to eat honey, and while the muishond was enjoying himself the inkalimeva went in and stole all the fat. It threw a stone at the muisbond, which caused him to look up.
The muishond cried out: "The fat belonging to all the animals has been eaten by the inkalimeva."
As soon as the animals beard the cry, they ran to the kraal and killed the muishond.
They put fat in the kraal a third time, and appointed the duiker (impunzi) to be the keeper of the gate. The duiker agreed, and the others went away. In a short time the inkalimeva made its appearance. It proposed to the duiker that they should play hide and look for. The duiker agreed to this. Then the inkalimeva hid itself, and the duiker looked for it till he was so tired that he lay down and went to sleep. When the duiker was asleep, the inkalimeva ate up all the fat.
Then it threw a stone at the dulker, which caused him to jump up and cry out: "The fat belonging to all the animals has been eaten by the inkalimeva."
The animals, when they heard the cry, ran to the kraal and killed the duiker.
They put fat in the kraal the fourth fline, and appointed the bluebuck (inputi) to be the keeper of the gate. When the aninials went away, the inkalineva came as before.
It said: "What are you doitig by yourself?"
The bluebuck answered: "I am watching the fat belonging to all the animals."
The inkalimeva said: "I will be your companion. Come, let us scratch each other's heads."
The bluebuck agreed to this. The inkalimeva sat down and scratched the head of the other till he went to sleep. Then it arose and ate all the fat. When it had finished, it threw a stone at the bluebuck and awakened him.
The bluebuck saw what had happened and cried out: "The fat belonging to all the animals has been eaten by the inkalinieva."
Then the animals ran up and killed the bluebuck also.
They put fat in the kraal the fifth time, and appointed the porcupine (incanda) to be the keeper of the gate. The animals went away, and the inkalimeva came as before.
It said to the porcupine, "Let us run a race against each other."
It let the porcupine beat in this race.
Then it said, "I did not think you could run so fast, but let us try again." They ran again, and it allowed the porcupine to beat the second time. They ran till the porcupine was so tired that he said, "Let us rest now."
They sat down to rest, and the porcupine went to sleep. Then the inkalimeva rose up and ate all the fat. When it had finished eating, it threw a stone at the porcupine, which caused him to jump up.
He called out with a loud voice, "The fat belonging to all the animals has been eaten by the inkalimeva."
Then the animals came running up and put the porcupine to death.
They put fat in the kraal the sixth time, and selected the hare (umvundla) to be the keeper of the gate. At first the hare would not consent.
He said, "The coney is dead, and the muisbond is dead, and the duiker is dead, and the bluebuck is dead, and the porcupine is dead, and you will kill me also."
They promised him that they would not kill him, and after a good deal of persuasion he at last agreed to keep the gate. When the animals were gone he laid himself down, but he only pretended to be asleep.
In a short time the inkalimeva went in, and was just going to take the fat when the hare cried out: "Let the fat alone."
The inkalimeva said, "Please let me have this little bit only."
The hare answered, mocking, "Please let me have this little bit only."
After that they became companions. The hare proposed that they should fasten each other's tail, and the inkalimeva agreed. The inkalimeva fastened the tail of the hare first.
The hare said, "Don't tie my tail so tight." Then the hare fastened the tail of the inkalimeva.
The inkalimeva said, "Don't tie my tail so tight," but the hare made no answer. After tying the tail of the inkalinieva very fast, the hare took his club and killed it. The hare took the tail of the inkalimeva and ate it, all except a little piece which he hid in the fence.
Then he called out, "The fat belonging to all the animals has been eaten by the inkalimeva."
The animals came running back, and when they saw that the inkalimeva was dead they rejoiced greatly. They asked the hare for the tail, which should be kept for the chief.
The hare replied, "The one I killed had no tail."
They said, "How can an inkalimeva be without a tail? "
They began to search, and at length they found a piece of the tail in the fence. They told the chief that the hare had eaten the tail.
He said, "Bring him to me!"
All the animals ran after the hare, but he fled, and they could not catch him. The hare ran into a hole, at the mouth of which the animals set a snare, and then went away. The hare remained in the hole for many days, but at length he managed to get out without being caught.
He went to a place where he found a bushbuck (imbabala) building a hut. There was a pot with meat in it on the fire.
He said to the bushbuck, Can I take this little piece of meat? "
The bushbuck answered, "You must not do it."
But he took the meat and ate it all. Afterwards he whistled in a particular manner, and there fell a storm of hail which killed the bushbuck. Then he took the skin of the bushbuck, and made for himself a mantle.
After this the hare went into the forest to procure some weapons to fight with. While he was cutting a stick the monkeys threw leaves upon him. He called to them to come down and beat him. They came down, but he killed them all with his weapons.

A White man, it is said, met Snake upon whom a large stone had fallen and covered her so that she could not rise. The White Man lifted the stone off Snake, but when he had done so, she wanted to bite him. The White Man said, " Stop! let us both go first to some wise people." They went to Hyena, and the White Man asked him, "Is it right that Snake should want to bite me, when I helped her as she lay under a stone and could not rise?"
Hyena (who thought he would get his share of the White Man's body) said, "If you were bitten what would it matter?"
Then Snake wanted to bite him, but the White Man said again, "Wait a little, and let us go to other wise people, that I may hear whether this is right."
They went and met Jackal. The White Man said to Jackal, "Is it right for Snake to want to bite me, when I lifted up the stone which lay upon her?"
Jackal replied, "I do not believe that Snake could be covered by a stone so she could not rise. Unless I saw it with my two eyes, I would not believe it. Therefore, come let us go and see the place where you say it happened whether it can be true."
They went, and arrived at the place where it had happened. Jackal said, "Snake, lie down, and let thyself be covered."
Snake did so, and the White Man covered her with the stone; but although she exerted herself very much, she could not rise. Then the White Man wanted again to release Snake, but Jackal interfered, and said, "Do not lift the stone. She wanted to bite you, therefore she may rise by herself."
Then they both went away and left Snake under the stone.

A Dutchman was walking by himself and saw Snake lying under a large :stone. Snake implored his help; but when she had become free she said, "Now I shall eat you."
The Man answered, "That is not right. Let us first go to Hare."
When Hare had heard the affair, he said, "It is right."
"No," said the Man, "let us ask Hyena."
Hyena declared the same, saying, "It is right."
"Now let us ask Jackal," said the Man in his despair.
Jackal answered very slowly and considerately, doubting the whole affair, and demanding to see first the place, and whether the Man was able to lift the stone. Snake lay down, and the Man, to prove the truth of his account, put the stone again over her.
When she was fast, Jackal said, "Now let her lie there."

Jackal and Hyena were together, it is said, when a white cloud rose. Jackal descended upon it, and ate of the cloud as if it were fat.
When he wanted to come down, he said to Hyena, "My sister, as I am going to divide with thee, catch me well." So she caught him, and broke his fall. Then she also went up and ate there, high up on the top of the cloud.
When she was satisfied, she said, "My greyish brother, now catch me. well." The greyish rogue said to his friend, "My sister, I shall catch thee well. Come therefore down."
He held up his hands, and she came down from the cloud, and when she was near, Jackal cried out (painfully jumping to one side), "My sister, do not take it ill. Oh me! Oh me! A thorn has pricked me and sticks in me. "Thus she fell down from above, and was sadly hurt.
Since that day, it is said that Hyena's hind feet have been shorter and smaller than the front ones.

LION, it is said, was ill, and they all went to see him in his suffering. But Jackal did not go, because the traces of the people who went to see him did not turn back. Thereupon, he was accused by Hyena, who said, "Though I go to look, yet Jackal does not want to come and look at the man's sufferings."
Then Lion let Hyena go, in order that she might catch Jackal; and she did so, and brought him.
Lion asked Jackal: "Why did you not come here to see me?"
Jackal said, "Oh, no! when I heard that my uncle was so very ill, I went to the witch (doctor) to consult him, whether and what medicine would be good for my uncle against the pain. The doctor said to me, 'Go and tell your uncle to take hold of Hyena and draw off her skin, and put it on while it is still warm. Then he will recover.' Hyena is one who does not care for my uncle's sufferings."
Lion followed his advice, got hold of Hyena, drew the skin over her cars, whilst she howled with all her might, and put it on.

Jackal, it is said, came once to Dove, who lived on the top of a rock, and said, "Give me one of your little ones."
Dove answered, "I shall not do anything of the kind."
Jackal said, "Give me it at once! Otherwise, I shall fly up to you." Then she threw one down to him.
He came back another day and demanded another little one, and she gave it to him. After Jackal had gone, Heron came, and asked,
Dove, why do you cry? "
Dove answered him, "Jackal has taken away my little ones; it is for this that I cry." He asked her, In what manner did he take them?" She answered him, "When he asked me I refused him; but when he said, 'I shall at once fly up, therefore give me it,' I threw it down to him."
Heron said, "Are you such a fool as to give your young ones to Jackal, who cannot fly?" Then, with the admonition to give no more, he went away.
Jackal came again, and said, "Dove, give me a little one." Dove refused, and told him that Heron had told her that he could not fly up. Jackal said, "I shall catch him."
So when Heron came to the banks of the water, Jackal asked him: "Brother Heron, when the wind comes from this side, how will you stand?" He turned his neck towards him and said, "I stand thus, bending my neck on one side." Jackal asked him again, "When a storm comes and when it rains, how do you stand?" He said to him: "I stand thus, indeed, bending my neck down."
Then Jackal beat him on his neck, and broke his neck in the middle.
Since that day Heron's neck is bent.

Cock, it is said, was once overtaken by Jackal, and caught. Cock said to Jackal, "Please, pray first (before you kill me), as the white man does."
Jackal asked, "In what manner does he pray? Tell me."
"He folds his bands in praying," said Cock. Jackal folded his hands and prayed. Then Cock spoke again: "You ought not to look about you as you do. You had better shut your eyes." He did so; and Cock flew away, upbraiding at the same time Jackal with these words, "You rogue! do you also pray? "
There sat Jackal, speechless, because he had been outdone.

Two powers, Elephant and Rain, had a dispute. Elephant said, "If you say that you nourish me, in what way is it that you do so?" Rain answered, "If you say that I do not nourish you, when I go away, will you not die? And Rain then departed.
Elephant said, "Vulture! cast lots to make rain for me."
Vulture said, "I will not cast lots."
Then Elephant said to Crow, "Cast lots! who answered, "Give the things with which I may cast lots." Crow cast lots and rain fell. It rained at the lagoons, but they dried up, and only one lagoon remained.
Elephant went a-hunting. There was, however, Tortoise, to whom Elephant said, "Tortoise, remain at the water!" Thus Tortoise was left behind when Elephant went a-hunting.
There came Giraffe, and said to Tortoise, "Give me water!" Tortoise answered, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Zebra, who said to Tortoise,
"Give me water!" Tortoise answered, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Gemsbok, and said to Tortoise,
"Give me water!" Tortoise answered, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Wildebeest, and said, "Give me water!" Tortoise said, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Roodebok, and said to Tortoise,
"Give me water!" Tortoise answered, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Springbok, and said to Tortoise,
"Give me water!" Tortoise said, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Jackal, and said to Tortoise,
"Give me water!" Tortoise said, "The water belongs to Elephant."
There came Lion, and said, "Little Tortoise, give me water!" When little Tortoise was about to say something, Lion got hold of him and beat him; Lion drank of the water, and since then the animals drink water.
When Elephant came back from the hunting, he said, "Little Tortoise, is there water?" Tortoise answered, "The animals have drunk the water." Elephant asked, "Little Tortoise, shall I chew you or swallow you down?" Little Tortoise said, "Swallow me, if you please!" and Elephant swallowed him whole.
After Elephant had swallowed Little Tortoise, and he had entered his body, he tore off his liver, heart, and kidneys. Elephant said, "Little Tortoise, you kill me."
So Elephant died; but little Tortoise came out of his dead body, and went wherever he liked.

Giraffe and Tortoise, they say, met one day. Giraffe said to Tortoise, "At once I could trample you to death." Tortoise, being afraid, remained silent. Then Giraffe said, "At once I could swallow you." Tortoise said, in answer to this, " Well, I just belong to the family of those whom it has always been customary to swallow." Then Giraffe swallowed Tortoise; but when the latter was being gulped down, he stuck in Giraffe's throat, and as the latter could not get it down, he was choked to death.
When Giraffe was dead, Tortoise crawled out and went to Crab (who is considered as the mother of Tortoise), and told her what had happened. Then Crab said:
"The little Crab! I could sprinkle it under its arm with Boochoo,
The crooked-legged little one, I could sprinkle under its arm."
Tortoise answered its mother and said:
Have you not always sprinkled me,
That you want to sprinkle me now?
Then they went and fed for a whole year on the remains of Giraffe.

One day, it is said, the Tortoises held a council how they might hunt Ostriches, and they said, "Let us, on both sides, stand in rows near each other, and let one go to hunt the Ostriches, so that they must flee along through the midst of us." They did so, and as they were many, the Ostriches were obliged to run along through the midst of them. During this they did not move, but, remaining always in the same places, called each to the other, "Are you there?" and each one answered, "I am here." The Ostriches hearing this, ran so tremendously that they quite exhausted their strength, and fell down. Then the Tortoises assembled by-and-by at the place where the Ostriches had fallen, and devoured them.

One day, it is said, the following story happened:
Mouse had torn the clothes of Itkler (the tailor), who then went to Baboon, and accused Mouse with these words:
"In this manner I come to thee: Mouse has torn my clothes, but will not know anything of it, and accuses Cat; Cat protests likewise her innocence, and says, 'Dog must have done it; but Dog denies it also, and declares Wood has done it; and Wood throws the blame on Fire, and says, 'Fire did it'; Fire says, ' have not, Water did it'; Water says, 'Elephant tore the clothes'; and Elephant says, 'Ant tore them.' Thus a dispute has arisen among them. Therefore, 1, Itkler, come to thee with this proposition: Assemble the people and try them in order that I may get satisfaction."
Thus he spake, and Baboon assembled them for trial. Then they made the same excuses which had been mentioned by Itkler, each one putting the blame upon the other.
So Baboon did not see any other way of punishing them, save through making them punish each other; he therefore said,
"Mouse, give Itkler satisfaction."
Mouse, however, pleaded not guilty. But Baboon said, "Cat, bite Mouse." She did so.
He then put the same question to Cat, and when she exculpated herself, Baboon called to Dog, "Here, bite Cat."
In this manner Baboon questioned them all, one after the other, but they each denied the charge. Then he addressed the following words to them, and said,
Wood, beat Dog.
Fire, burn Wood.
Water, quench Fire.
Elephant, drink Water.
Ant, bite Elephant in his most tender parts."
They did so, and since that day they cannot any longer agree with each other.
Ant enters into Elephant's most tender parts and bites him.
Elephant swallows Water.
Water quenches Fire.
Fire consumes Wood.
Wood beats Dog.
Dog bites Cat.
And Cat bites Mouse.
Through this judgment Itkler got satisfaction, and addressed Baboon in the following manner:
"Yes! Now I am content, since I have received satisfaction, and with all my heart I thank thee, Baboon, because thou hast exercised justice on my behalf and given me redress."
Then Baboon said, "From to-day I will not any longer be called Jan, but Baboon shall be my name."
Since that time Baboon walks on all fours, having probably lost the privilege of walking erect through this foolish judgment.

Baboon, it is said, once worked bamboos, sitting on the edge of a precipice, and Lion stole upon him. Baboon, however, had fixed some round, glistening, eyelike plates on the back of his head. When, therefore, Lion crept upon him, he thought, when Baboon was looking at him, that he sat with his back towards him, and crept with all his might upon him. When, however, Baboon turned his back towards him, Lion thought that he was seen, and bid himself. Thus, when Baboon looked at him, he crept upon him. When he was near him Baboon looked up, and Lion continued to creep upon him. Baboon said (aside), "Whilst I am looking at him he steals upon me, whilst my hollow eyes are on him."
When at last Lion sprung at him, he lay (quickly) down upon his face, and Lion jumped over him, falling down the precipice, and was dashed to pieces.

The Baboons, it is said, used to disturb the Zebra Mares in drinking. But one of the Mares became the mother of a foal. The others then helped her to suckle (the young stallion), that he might soon grow up.
When he was grown up and they were in want of water, he brought them to the water. The Baboons, seeing this, came, as they formerly were used to do, into their way, and kept them from the water.
While the Mares stood thus, the Stallion stepped forward, and spoke to one of the Baboons, "Thou gum-eater's child!"
The Baboon said to the Stallion, "Please open thy mouth, that I may see what thou livest on." The Stallion opened his mouth, and it was milky.
Then the Stallion said to the Baboon, "Please open thy mouth also, that I may see," The Baboon did so, and there was some gum in it. But the Baboon quickly licked some milk off the Stallion's tongue. The Stallion on this became angry, took the Baboon by his shoulders, and pressed him upon a hot, flat rock. Since that day the Baboon has a bald place on his back.
The Baboon said, lamenting, "I, my mother's child, I, the gum-eater, am outdone by this milkeater!

Lion, it is said, used once to fly, and at that time nothing could live before him. As he was unwilling that the bones of what he caught should be broken into pieces, he made a pair of White Crows watch the bones, leaving them behind at the kraal whilst he went a-hunting. But one day Great Frog came there, broke the bones in pieces, and said, "Why can men and animals live no longer?" And he added these words, "When he comes, tell him that I live at yonder pool; if he wishes to see me, he must come there."
Lion, lying in wait (for game), wanted to fly up, but found he could not fly. Then he got angry, thinking that at the kraal something was wrong, and returned home. When he arrived, he asked, "What have you done that I cannot fly?" Then they answered and said, "Some one came here, broke the bones into pieces, and said, 'If he want me, he may look for me at yonder pool!"' Lion went, and arrived while Frog was sitting at the water's edge, and he tried to creep stealthily upon him. When he was about to get hold of him, Frog said, "Ho!" and, diving, went to the other side of the pool, and sat there. Lion pursued him; but as he could not catch him he returned home.
From that day, it is said, Lion walked on his feet, and also began to creep upon (bis game); and the White Crows became entirely dumb since the day that they said, "Nothing can be said of that matter."

It is said that when Lion and Gurikhoisip (the Only man), together with Baboon, Buffalo, and other friends, were playing one day at a certain game, there was a thunderstorm and rain at Aroxaams. Lion and Gurikhoisip began to quarrel. "I shall run to the rain-field," said Lion. Gurikhoisip said also, "I shall run to the rain-field." As neither would concede this to the other, they separated (angrily). After they had parted, Lion went to tell his mother those things which they had both said.
His Mother said to him, "My son! that Man whose head is in a line with his shoulders and breast, who has pinching weapons, who keeps white dogs, who goes about wearing the tuft of a tiger tail, beware of him!" Lion, however, said, "Why need I be on my guard against those whom I know?" Lioness answered, "My Son, take care of him who has pinching weapons!" But Lion would not follow his Mother's advice, and the same morning, when it was still pitch dark, he went to Aroxaams, and laid himself in ambush. Gurikhoisip went also that morning to the same place. When he had arrived he let his dogs drink, and then bathe. After they had finished they wallowed. Then also Man drank; and, when he had done drinking, Lion came out of the bush. Dogs surrounded him as his Mother had foretold, and he was speared by Gurikhoisip. Just as lie became aware that he was speared, the Dogs drew him down again. In this manner he grew faint. While he was in this state, Gurikhoisip said to the Dogs, "Let him alone now, that he may go and be taught by his Mother." So the Dogs let him go. They left him, and went home as he lay there. The same night he walked towards home, but whilst he was on the way his strength failed him, and he lamented:
"Mother! take me up!
Grandmother! take me up! Oh me! Alas!"
At the dawn of day his Mother heard his wailing, and said-
"My Son, this is the thing which I have told thee:
"Beware of the one who has pinching weapons,
Who wears a tuft of tiger's tail,
Of him who has white dogs!
Alas! thou son of her who is short-eared,
Thou, my short-eared child!
Son of her who eats raw flesh,
Thou flesh-devourer;
Son of her whose nostrils are red from the prey,
Thou with blood-stained nostrils!
Son of her who drinks pit-water,
Thou water-drinker!'"

Some Women, it is said, went out to seek roots and herbs and other wild food. On their way home they sat down and said, Let us taste the food of the field." Now they found that the food picked by one of them was sweet, while that of the others was bitter. The latter said to each other, "Look here! this Woman's herbs are sweet." Then they said to the owner of the sweet food, "Throw it away and seek for other." So she threw away the food, and went to gather more. When she had collected a sufficient supply, she returned to join the other Women, but could not find them. She went therefore down to the river, where Hare sat lading water, and said to him, "Hare, give me some water that I may drink." But he replied, "This is the cup out of which my uncle (Lion) and I alone may drink."
She asked again: "Hare, draw water for me that I may drink." But Hare made the same reply. Then she snatched the cup from him and drank, but he ran home to tell his uncle of the outrage which had been committed.
The Woman meanwhile replaced the cup and went away. After she had departed Lion came down, and, seeing her in the distance, pursued her on the road. When she turned round and saw him coming, she sang in the following manner:
"My mother, she would not let me seek herbs,
Herbs of the field, food from the field. Hoo!"
When Lion at last came up with the Woman, they hunted each other round a shrub. She wore many beads and arm-rings, and Lion said, "Let me put them on!" So she lent them to him, but he afterwards refused to return them to her.
They then hunted each other again round the shrub, till Lion fell (town, and the Woman jumped upon him, and kept him there. Lion (uttering a form of conjuration) said:
"My Aunt! it is morning, and time to rise;
Pray, rise from me!"
She then rose from him, and they hunted again after each other round the shrub, till the Woman fell down, and Lion jumped upon her. She then addressed him:
"My Uncle! it is morning, and time to rise;
Pray, rise from me!"
He rose, of course, and they hunted each other again, till Lion fell a second time. When she jumped upon him he said:
My Aunt! it is morning, and time to rise;
Pray, rise from me!"
They rose again and hunted after each other. The Woman at last fell down. But this time when she repeated the above conjuration, Lion said:
"Hè Kha! Is it morning, and time to rise?"
He then ate her, taking care, however, to leave her skin whole, which he put on, together with her dress and ornaments, so that he looked quite like a woman, and then went home to her kraal.
When this counterfeit woman arrived, her little sister, crying, said, "My sister, pour some milk out for me." She answered, "I shall not pour you out any." Then the Child addressed their Mother: "Mama, do pour out some for me." The Mother of the kraal said, "Go to your sister, and let her give it to you!" The little Child said again to her sister, "Please, pour out for me!" She, however, repeated her refusal, saying, "I will not do it." Then the Mother of the kraal said to the little One, "I refused to let her (the elder sister) seek herbs in the field, and I do not know what may have happened; go therefore to Hare, and ask him to pour out for you."
So then Hare gave her some milk; but her elder sister said, "Come and share it with me." The little Child then went to her sister with her bamboo (cup), and they both sucked the milk out of it. Whilst they were doing this, some milk was spilt on the little one's hand, and the elder sister licked it up with her tongue, the roughness of which drew blood; this, too, the Woman licked up.
The little child complained to her Mother:
"Mama, sister pricks holes in me and sucks the blood. The Mother said, "With what Lion's nature your sister went the way that I forbade her, and returned, I do not know."
Now the Cows hurried, and the elder sister cleansed the pails in order to milk them. But when she approached the Cows with a thong (in order to tie their fore-legs), they all refused to be milked by her.
Hare said, "Why do not you sand before the Cow?" She replied, "Hare, call your brother, and do you two stand before the Cow." Her husband said, "What has come over her that the Cows refuse her? These are the same Cows she always milks." The Mother (of the kraal) said, "What has happened this evening? These are Cows that she always milks without assistance. What can have affected her that she comes home a woman with a Lion's nature."
The elder daughter then said to her Mother, I shall not milk the Cows." With these words she sat down. The Mother said therefore to Hare, "Bring me the bamboos, that I may milk. I do not know what has come over the girl."
So the Mother herself milked the cows, and when she had done so, Hare brought the bamboos to the young wife's house, where her husband was, but she (the wife) did not give him (her husband) anything to eat. But when at night time she fell asleep, they saw some of the Lion's hair, which was hanging out where he had slipped on the Woman's skin, and they cried, "Verily! this is quite another being. It is for this reason that the Cows refused to be milked."
Then the people of the kraal began to break up the hut in which Lion lay asleep. When they took off the mats, they said (conjuring them), "If thou art favourably inclined to me, O Mat, give the sound 'sawa'" (meaning, making no noise).
To the poles (on which the but rested) they said, " If thou art favourably inclined to me, O Pole, thou must give the sound 'gara.'
They addressed also the bamboos and the bedskins in a similar manner.
Thus gradually and noiselessly they removed the hut and all its contents. Then they took bunches of grass, put them over the Lion, and lighting them, said, "If thou art favourably inclined to me, O Fire, thou must flare up, 'boo boo,' before thou comest to the heart."
So the Fire flared up when it came towards the heart, and the heart of the Woman jumped upon the ground. The Mother (of the kraal) picked it up, and put it into a calabash.
Lion, from his place in the fire, said to the Mother (of the kraal), "How nicely I have eaten your daughter." The Woman answered, "You have also now a comfortable place!"
Now the Woman took the first milk of as many Cows had calves, and put it into the calabash where her daughter's heart was; the calabash increased in size, and in proportion to this the girl grew again inside it.
One day, when the Mother (of the kraal) went out to fetch wood, she said to Hare, "By the time that I come back you must have everything nice and clean." But during her Mother's absence, the girl crept out of the calabash, and put the hut in good order, as she had been used to do in former days, and said to Hare, "When Mother comes back and asks, 'Who has done these things?' you must say, 'I, Hare, did them.' "After she had done all, she hid herself on the stage.
When the Mother of the kraal came home, she said, "Hare, who has done these things? They look just as they used when my daughter did them." Hare said, "I did the things." But the Mother would not believe it, and looked at the calabash. Seeing it was empty, she searched the stage and found her daughter. Then she embraced and kissed her, and from that day the girl stayed with her Mother, and did every thing as she was wont in former times; but she now remained unmarried.

The Sun, it is said, was one day on earth, and the men who were travelling saw him sitting by the wayside, but passed him without notice. Jackal, however, who came after them, and also sitting, went to him and said, "Such a fine little child is left behind by the men." He then took Sun up, and put it into this awa-skin (on his back). When it burnt him, he said, "Get down," and shook himself; but Sun stuck fast to his back, and burnt Jackal's back black from that day.

It is said that once Sun was on earth, and caught Horse to ride it. But it was unable to bear his weight, and therefore Ox took the place of Horse, aud carried Sun on its back. Since that time Horse is cursed in these words, because it could not carry Sun's weight:
From to-day thou shalt have a (certain) time of dying.
This is thy curse, that thou hast a (certain) time of dying.
And day and night shalt thou eat,
But the desire of thy heart shall not be at rest,
Though thou grazest till morning and again until sunset.
Behold, this is the judgment which I pass upon thee," said Sun.
Since that day Horse's (certain) time of dying commenced.

The wild animals, it is said, were once assembled at Lion's. When Lion was asleep, Jackal persuaded Little Fox to twist a rope of ostrich sinews, in order to play Lion a trick. They took ostrich sinews, twisted them, and fastened the rope to Lion's tail, and the other end of the rope they tied to a shrub. When Lion awoke, and saw that he was tied up, he became angry, and called the animals together. When they had assembled, Lion said (using this form of conjuration)--
"What child of his mother and father's love,
Whose mother and father's love has tied me? "
Then answered the animal to whom the question was first put--
I, child of my mother and father's love,
I, mother and father's love, I have not done it.
All answered the same; but when he asked Little Fox, Little Fox said--
I, child of my mother and father's love,
I, mother and father's love, have tied thee!
Then Lion tore the rope made of sinews, and ran after Little Fox. But Jackal said:
"My boy, thou son of lean Mrs. Fox, thou wilt never be caught."
Truly Lion was thus beaten in running by Little Fox.

The Moon, it is said, sent once an Insect to Men, saying, "Go thou to Men, and tell them, 'As I die, and dying live, so ye shall also die, and dying live.'" The Insect started with the message, but whilst on his way was overtaken by the Hare, who asked: "On what errand art thou bound? "The Insect answered: "I am sent by the Moon to Men, to tell them that as she dies, and dying lives, they also shall die, and dying live." The Hare said, "As thou art an awkward runner, let me go" (to take the message). With these words he ran off, and when he reached Men, he said, "I am sent by the Moon to tell you, 'As I die, and dying perish, in the same manner ye shall also die and come wholly to an end."' Then the Hare returned to the Moon, and told her what he had said to Men. The Moon reproached him angrily, saying, "Darest thou tell the people a thing which I have not said? With these words she took up a piece of wood, and struck him on the nose. Since that day the Hare's nose is slit.

The Moon dies, and rises to life again. The Moon said to the Hare, " Go thou to Men, and tell them, 'Like as I die and rise to life again, so you also shall die and rise to life again.'" The Hare went to the Men, and said, "Like as I die and do not rise to life again, so you shall also die, and not rise to life again." When he returned the Moon asked him, "What hast thou said?" "I have told them, 'Like as I die and do not rise to life again, so you shall also die and not rise to life again."' "What," said the Moon, " hast thou said that?" And she took a stick and beat the Hare on his mouth, which was slit by the blow. The Hare fled, and is still fleeing.

The Moon, on one occasion, sent the Hare to the earth to inform Men that as she (the Moon) died away and rose again, so mankind should die and rise again. Instead, however, of delivering this message as given, the Hare, either out of forgetfulness or malice, told mankind that as the Moon rose and died away, so Man should die and rise no more. The Hare, having returned to the Moon, was questioned as to the message delivered, and the Moon, having heard the true state of the case, became so enraged with him that she took up a hatchet to split his head; falling short, however, of that, the hatchet fell upon the upper lip of the Hare, and cut it severely. Hence it is that we see the "Hare-lip." The Hare, being duly incensed at having received such treatment, raised his claws, and scratched the Moon's face and the dark spots which we now see on the surface of the Moon are the scars which she received on that occasion.

The Moon, they say, wished to send a message to Men, and the Hare said that he would take it. "Run, then," said the Moon, "and tell Men that as I die and am renewed, so shall they also be renewed." But the Hare deceived Men, and said, "As I die and perish, so shall you also."

God (Unknlunkulu) arose from beneath (the seat of the spiritual world, according to the Zulu idea), and created in the beginning men, animals, and all things. He then sent for the Chameleon, and said, "Go, Chameleon, and tell Men that they shall not die." The Chameleon went, but it walked slowly, and loitered on the way, eating of a shrub called Bukwebezane.
When it had been away some time, God sent the Salamander after it, ordering him to make haste and tell Men that they should die. The Salamander went on his way with this message, outran the Chameleon, and, arriving first where the Men were, told them that they must die.

In the beginning there were two. One was blind, the other was always hunting. This hunter found at last a hole in the earth from which game proceeded and killed the young. The blind man, feeling and smelling them, said, "They are not game, but cattle."
The blind man afterwards recovered his sight, and going with the hunter to this hole, saw that they were cows with their calves. He then quickly built a kraal (fence made of thorns) round them, and anointed himself, just as Hottentots (in their native state) are still wont to do.
When the other, who now with great trouble had to seek his game, came and saw this, he wanted to anoint himself also. "Look here!" said the other, "you must throw the ointment into the fire, and afterwards use it." He followed this advice, and the flames flaring up into his face, burnt him most miserably; so that he was glad to make his escape. The other, however, called to him: "Here, take the kirri (a knobstick), and run to the hills to hunt there for honey."
Hence sprung the race of Bushmen.
